## 2004-03-11T15:16:33Z — pycyn (@pycyn) (post 328)

Title: Complexity of aspects
Message-Id: pycyn-0-beb71441db@www.lojban.org

(I don't know how much of all this needs to be in nor where)
Aspect has a variety of sources and a corresponding variety of interpretations (or metaphorical uses).  The official line looks at the "natural" parts of a process as spread out in time, but translinguistically the same forms have been used for psychological states, for causal claims, and, indeed, for tenses.  The application to events of types other than processes (activities, states, achievements, at least) also creates some variations.  Even the standard forms contain some not strictly temporal (though "natural part") notions, e.g., the distinctioon between the end and the completion of an event (strictly only for processes again).
Some specific points:
{pu'o}, unlike all the others, does not imply that the event actually took place: an event may be on the verge of occurring (all its causes present, fully anticipated, etc.) and still not occur for some external, unexpected, ... reason.
Completive ("perfective" traditionally) typically requires some residuum of the event-- the built house from building a house for example.  Classically, it cannot be used after the agent in the event is dead.  (These restrictions may not apply in Lojban even though they generally hold in natural laguages.)

"inchoative" is standard linguistics -- I think the idea comes not from the current usage of "inchoate" as "beginning, early stage" but from the older sense, literally, "harness" -- the necessary and implicit precursor of plowing.  "prosepective" is better for the psychological viewpoint.
"achievative" comes from the rather different notion of an ach8ievement, a type of event that is inherently a point, the completion of a process, perhaps with some added features: "winning a race" (or losing, for that matter) which is completing the running with added features; doing so before anyone else (or after someone else).  Achievements don't get well treated here; they have no progressive (though the corresponding process does and may be extended to appear to be about the achievement -- that that then turns into a prospective: "he is winning the race.")
There was once a lot of discussion about some other possible aspects, related especially to the superfective; the subperfective (quitting before done - a specification of cessative) and the mirror cases of starting too soon or too late.  The use of aspects as sumti tcita also raised some issues: what do they mean?  what goes in as sumti?  The spatial analogs also raised -- and complicated -- problems (does {za'o} as st take the target overshot or the point actually reached as sumti -- presumably the target overshot, but not without some argument).
pc
