## 2003-09-26T17:28:51Z — pycyn (@pycyn) (post 68)

Title: Summary and branching quantifiers

There are several problems here. One set focuses on scope, another on collaboration and the two intersect in a variety of ways.
On collaboration first: (I fall back on NCLL terminology here as less confusing: {loi PA broda} is PA broda acting collaboratively) when loi pa broda does something, what the individual broda do is not directly mentioned: loi ci gerku attacking a man does not say which dog(s) bit, snarled at, etc. the man, only that there were three of them and what they did amounted to an attack  -- even if nothing any one of them did did.  Similarly, if a dog attacked loi vo nanmu, it is not clear what the dog did to any one of them (bit, gowled or snapped at, bristled, etc.) but that the group as a whole was under attack (note, this attack may be subjective by some or all of the group).  Finally of course, if loi ci gerku attack loi vo nanmu,  the various one-on-one events are not mentioned and are all but ultimately irrelevant.  In this discussion, I am taking PA1 of PA1 loi PA2 broda to be multipicative and so here to be glorked as -- typically -- either pa or something that fits with a "generally" modality, but my cases are assuming (and perhaps should say) pa.

Under these assumptions, and linear scoping, all of the various "Three dog, four men" cases make perfectly good sense as originally described.  But they leave out a number of cases that one would like to deal with at least occasionally (and which reflect in other cases as well -- particularly the distribution of connectives), where the expansion of two components seems more to be parallel than hierarchical.  

Logic has dealt occasionally with branching quantifiers, that is more than one quantifier over a single matrix but with neither in the scope of the other, so that instantiation (for example) takes place simultaneously in both rather than first in one and then -- depending on that result -- in the other.  In Logic this seemingly first order problem can be dealt with in second order (or higher) logics -- arithmetic and set theory and so on and the result reflected back in applied first order forms, e.g., quantification over ordered pairs rather than individuals, with the parts of the matrix involved being further specified as taking the first (second) member.  Similarly, quantifiers within the scope of several others but actually dependent on only some of them, not all, can be replaced by functions on only the signicant bound variables (including constants for those independent of any other quantifier).  Or, one can try to introduce into the one dimensional writing of logical symbols a second dimension, allowing branching quantifiers and quantifier strings (Frege already had some of this -- for connectives at least -- but did not make much of it).

What Logic does is remote from Lojban in several ways: it deals generally only with universals and particulars, not various (quasi)numerical quantifiers, it deals only with prenex forms -- at least over completed units, it is not tied down to meaning of individual bits (it can throw in a function without explaining it or modify a predicate ad lib).  That being said, Lojban ''could'' reproduce many of the logical techniques, at some cost to naturalness and perhaps intelligibility.  Only the function for selective quantifier fits naturally into Lojban, where the preicates into which the selective variable fit automatically provide the corresponding predicate: "Everybody loves somebody" becomes "Every x loves the beloved of x" or some such {ro da prami lo se prami be da} (with a few problems cleared up somehow). 

The usual solution to be proposed for the general case -- short of spelling out all the gory details -- has been, however, to try to linearize branching structures, both quantificational and connective.  Since two-dimenionality is not feasible -- in speaking even if in writing -- there have been several attempts to make do with what amounts to sub/superscripting.  
The simplest is term sets: two or more quantifier expressions joined by {ce'e} or whatever to indicate that they are mutually independent.  This works only so long as the branches are each only one quantifier long and the quantifiers can be brought together in one place without too much jiggling of the selbri.  

At the other extreme is to give an explicit dependency label to every quantifier.  This has the advantage that physical order no longer determines scope and so we can go for graceful style rather than having to bend things around to get the right claim (the conflict of stress and meaning in the palcement of tense expressions, for example).  But it makes every quantifier at least one syllable longer, and, in complex cases, where one quantifier is in the scope of one but not another at the next higher level, perhaps many syllable longer.  Of course, these additions can be reduced by default conventions of various sorts -- assuming l-r hierarchy wherever there is no marking, for example, but the system will still occasionally be used and strain comprehension in the process (the old memory limits).  

xorxes comment on {na} are reflected (in slightly different form) in the Logic discussions, where the usual dodge is to get negations out of the way completely before mucking about with quantifiers at all.
