## 2004-06-19T15:57:51Z — pycyn (@pycyn) (post 1340)

Title: The Logicians' View
Message-Id: pycyn-0-7e21218122@www.lojban.org

With rare exceptions in special cases, logicians take the universal and particular quantifiers to be importing.  The ideal system -- since roughly 250 BCE -- has been A+ E- I+ O-.  These continue to be the underlying quantifiers (the E and O rarely used) in logic.  Two complication have made for the appearance that non-importing quantifers are used.  Both of them stem from the 19th century habit of translating "All S is P" into "For all x, if x is S then x is P,"  which, while simplifying a number of moves, was inaccurate as a translation and destryed the original system.  Now, some people took what corresponded to the "All S,"  namely roughly "For all x, if x is S then" as though it were the quantifier in this new form, and then, noting correctly that one could not infer the corresponding "quantifier " of the particular claim, roughly "For some x, both x is S and" declared that this formulation contained a non-importing quantifier.  But, of course, the quantifier here is just "For all x" and "For some x."  The non-importing of S comes from it being buried under a negation and a disjunction, either of which would prevent the move.  The other move was to take the translation -- never mind whether it was accurate -- as the latest true word  and so declare that, since the translation of "All S is P" doesn't imply the translation of "Some S is P,"  "All S is P" does not have existential import (rather than say: "Hey, that was one lousy translation!")
(I can't pass over the fact that the people who wrote 19th century books on restricted quantifier logic were, to a man, not logicians -- as Lewis Carroll used to delight in proving.  People who still teach this stuff by and large are not either, being Philosophy teachers dragooned into teaching "Critical Thinking" or some such crap.)

The short solution to all this muddle is to note that there are two kinds of quantifiers.  The unrestricted one, "For all x" and "For some x," range over everything (or rather over whatever broad domain one means to be logicking about -- numbers, sets  and the like usually).  The other, restricted quantiifers, come with domain particular to that quantifier:  "All men" ranges over men, "Some integer" ranges over integers, and so on.  It should be noted that the unresrticted quantifiers generally are importing for their domain; that is, they assume that something is in that domain.  (There is a special part of logic called free logic that drops this assumption for various purposes.  In some contexts it is useful -- mainly for investigating different version of restricted quantifiers using variants of the translations above.  But it is not standard logic.) That is, they are importing:  "For all x if x is S then x is P" entails the same with the universal quantifier replaced by the particular:"For some x if x is S then x is P."  It is for the not-so-hot translations  that the various negation moves outlined above work.  For the restricted quantifiers, since -250 again, the negation have been, not surprisingly ~A = O, ~I = E and so on around the traditional square of opposition for the contraries.  Further, traditionally, A and E cannot both be true but can both be false (this and the rest follow from the contradictions) while I and E cannot both be false but can both be true.  In order to get the further moves, from O to I~ for example -- or to a non-importing A -- requires additons to these forms.  that is the modern forms now become the complex ones.  And the symbolic form, "For all x" is now seen to be a special case (indeed a stage in the historical development of quantifiers) of a reduced, tautotological, or contextually universal subject terms and an expanded predicate: "For all x,  if x is S then x is P" is "really" (just as "All S is P" is really this version -- except that this identification works), for some term, U, that will be used in all quantifiers in the context, "All U is P-if-S."  That this is clear can be seen in the way the simple "For all x, x is P" behaves -- like the restricted ones withthe assumption that the hidden term (U) refers to a non-empty class.
