# mail/lojban-list thread 1e032185a3b3-amber_diceless_rpg,_play_by_email,_all_are_invi | root a0efdb610807300036q6a606451j1dcbf0b9c6ef7926@mail.gmail.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2008-07-30T07:36:05Z | Brett Williams <mungojelly@gmail.com> | a0efdb610807300036q6a606451j1dcbf0b9c6ef7926@mail.gmail.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/1217403365.1e032185a3b3daf2.jbomohi:2,S
Cmacis recently suggested that we should organize a Lojbanic RPG, using the
Amber Diceless RPG system.  I used to use that system many years ago & I'm a
huge fan of the game and the world, so I've volunteered to be the game
master.  We've decided to structure it so that people with all
different degrees of skill in Lojban will be able to play:
Lojban will have a central role in-game, standing in for Thari, the language
of Amber-- but because of the situation of the player characters, they will
have varying degrees of knowledge in Thari, and some may know only a few
words.  Players will thus be able to choose characters whose in-game
Thari ability matches their real-world Lojban ability.  (We
might even be able to interest some Amber folks in Lojban!)

The unique nature of the Amber world also makes it unusually suited to
playing by email amongst people with different schedules and different
amounts of time to participate.  Different places in the world have vastly
different timescales, so it's possible that if you are less engaged in the
game your character could be somewhere where time is slower.  The characters
will all be relatives, siblings who grew up together and are now engaged in
a grand drama over many worlds-- if any two players want to play a scene
together, when they happen to be talking, they can do a scene from their
characters' childhood (and forward it to me so that I can weave all the
details people come up with about their characters' histories into what I
describe about the present).  Characters in Amber are often separated by
great distances, pursuing individual quests & goals, but also have ways of
coming into instant contact with each other.  So there's a lot of ways to
arrange roleplaying that's convenient for everyone.

Amber is a game of secrets.  It's alright if you don't know anything about
it; your character could be as ignorant about the true nature of this
strange world as you are, and it would be a fun world to find out about
in-game.  Amber at its heart is a family drama.  The characters are usually
a family who have grown up together, and rivaled with each other.  Their
relative ability in four qualities, Psyche, Endurance, Strength & Warfare,
is determined first by a point auction, and then by secret adjustments.  You
cannot win a fight by luck alone; a character with a higher score will
almost always win in the end, so you must be sure to plan your encounters
carefully, so that they fall upon your
strengths.  You also choose in secret what powers your character
will have, and certain items with unique properties that could make the
difference in critical moments.  Amber is a game where you must hold some
secrets, because surprise is often your only effective weapon.

Write me a note at mungojelly@gmail.com if you're interested in playing.
 The first thing we'll do is probably a practice auction (it's possible to
get carried away at the auction and get an unbalanced character, so I find
it's usually best to do a practice round first).  It's best to get in at the
beginning if you want to play, since the more people in the auction the
merrier.  If later it turns out you don't want to participate as much, we
can find a way to get your character out of the way for a while-- it's our
game, and we'll do whatever's convenient for us.

.i mi gleki lo nu ba dracyselkei
.i ko ko kurji
mu'o mi'e .selkik.

