# mail/lojban-list thread 7555fbcb6df5-conlang_the_movie_-_fundraiser | root 4927358b-7298-4900-94b2-de28623955f9@gmail.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2008-06-23T02:08:15Z | Baldvin Kári Sveinbjörnsson <baldvinkari@gmail.com> | 4927358b-7298-4900-94b2-de28623955f9@gmail.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/1214186895.7555fbcb6df50a3a.jbomohi:2,S
Dear Friends, Family and Fellow Conlangers,

We are currently in pre-production on a short Columbia University  
Graduate film called CONLANG and seeking your financial support for  
the production and post-production of the film!

The Production
CONLANG is a low-budget student film. But despite our size, we the  
filmmakers have high hopes and great ambition for the project. We've  
spent the past 6 months developing the script, with invaluable input  
from both our professors at Columbia University and actual conlangers.  
The result is a short film that will appeal to seasoned conlangers as  
well as the general public who may even never have heard of the word  
"conlang" before. After all, Carl's quest for love knows no language  
barriers.

Principal photography is set to take place in River Edge, NJ this  
summer. Conlang will be shot on a Sony EX-1 HD camcorder for optimum  
picture quality. Estimated running time is 12-15 minutes. The finished  
product will be ready by October 2008.

The Fundraiser
Swandive Films, Inc., the production company behind CONLANG, has  
started a fundraiser for the project. Our goal is to raise $4,000 for  
expenses related to transportation, equipment, props, set design,  
costumes, craft services, editing, sound design and music composition.  
The entire crew and cast is donating their time and energy.

There are two ways to donate!

1. Click on: http://www.acteva.com/booking.cfm?bevaid=162197
And make your donation using a credit card through a secure, online  
company. This is not a tax deductible donation but is a fast,  
convenient way to help out if you so desire!

OR

2. Make a tax deductible donation through IFP (Independent Feature  
Project), our Fiscal Sponsor (www.ifp.org).
Because our fiscal sponsorship is not set up to receive donations  
online, you would need to contact Swandive Films  
(mam@swandivefilms.com) to receive the form needed, then simply mail  
the check to us, and we will forward it to IFP.

IFP will send all donors a thank you letter once the donation is  
received, which acknowledges your tax-deductible donation.

Having to transport the cast and crew out to New Jersey for up to 6  
days along with set design, costumes and specialty equipment, really  
adds up.  Any amount is welcome, every dollar counts. By donating  
different amounts,
donors can guarantee themselves a certain title in the films credits,  
according to the following steps:

  $25 Friend
  $50 Sponsor
  $100-499 Patron
  $500-999 IMDb Producer Credit: Associate Producer
  $1000 or more IMDb Producer Credit: Executive Producer

Note that this is not an investment in the production, but simply a  
charitable donation to the project. In addition, any donation  
guarantees the donor a DVD copy of the film upon its completion.  
Patron donors and above will also receive an Autographed Photo of the  
entire Cast as a token of our appreciation.

About the Film
Conlang (short for "constructed language") is a universal story set in  
the unique world of conlanging. A comedy about secret crushes, extreme  
linguistics and the language of love, it tells the story of Carl, 26,  
an unemployed conlang enthusiast. Even though Carl has no trouble  
creating new languages, he has a hard time finding the words to  
express his feelings to Libby, his secret crush. One day, Carl has a  
chance of becoming president of the Constructed Language Society, a  
club of people joined by their passion for invented languages. But  
between battling for the presidency and perfecting on his own conlang,  
will he be able to share his true feelings with the girl he adores?

Again, thank you SO MUCH for your generous support. Many of you have  
already donated your time, energy, expertise, and even props to help  
us bring this film to fruition.

The Cast and Crew is looking forward to sharing our film with all of  
you in the near future!

Sincerely,
Baldvin Kari (producer/writer)
Marta Masferrer (director)



