# mail/jboske thread 168b04d0613f-digest_number_135 | root 1041033015.4889.75726.m7@yahoogroups.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2002-12-28T06:02:08Z | Nick Nicholas <opoudjis@optushome.com.au> | e374bf48-1a29-11d7-9383-003065d4ec72@optushome.com.au | mail/jboske/cur/1041055328.fe45f31cc0f6b8e9.jbomohi:2,S
On Saturday, Dec 28, 2002, at 10:50 Australia/Melbourne, 
jboske@yahoogroups.com wrote:



Message: 1
Date: Fri, 27 Dec 2002 13:16:22 +0000
From: "Jorge Llambias" <jjllambias@hotmail.com>
Subject: RE: propositionalism redux


OK. And you're saying that two pictures of three snakes
can be pictures of different things, but two branches that
each looks like three snakes must look like the same thing?

But don't we want every picture of a snake (opaque sense)
to have the same subject matter?

Carthage must be destroyed, and branches looking like snakes don't look 
like any one particular snake, but like the generic lot: prototype or 
unique.



Message: 5
Date: Fri, 27 Dec 2002 10:41:52 -0500 (EST)
From: John Cowan <cowan@ccil.org>
Subject: Re: mei, latest cause celebre

On my view, it's selbri-specific (and some selbri may be vague on this
point) whether "lo broda" means "a broda" and "loi broda" means "brodas
collectively", or "lo broda" means "a portion of broda" and "loi broda"
means "the broda substance". (I am neglecting quantifiers here.)

So do you mean something like, lo remna cu sanga vs. loi remna cu sanga 
= individual/substance, lo remna cu pesxu vs. loi remna cu pesxu = 
portion/substance?



I was going to reject this, but right now I don't see how...



Message: 8
Date: Fri, 27 Dec 2002 10:55:53 -0500 (EST)
From: John Cowan <cowan@ccil.org>
Subject: Re: more on Collectives (was: RE: mei, latest cause celebre


I will excuse piro loi nalmerko ke jboske prenu for not knowing that

the NAACP and the promoters of the Million-Man March are utterly 
opposed

politically and otherwise

Oh right. Nation of Islam != NAACP. My bad.



(after all, pisu'o ny. comes from a country
where Unique-InMind-Politician is named "Bob"),

? You're not referring to Bob Hawke, erstwhile PM of Australia, are you?



Message: 13
Date: Fri, 27 Dec 2002 11:13:23 -0600
From: Jordan DeLong <fracture@allusion.net>
Subject: Re: Digest Number 134


[Nice on the big digest-style stuff, Nick. Helps keep the volume
down]

Helps keep my sanity. Now you know why I have no proper Reply-To 
headers, though.



I think depiction is a different issue, though:



Using prototype-style lo'e (which I could maybe live with, though
I think the statistical one is better):
ti pixra da poi simsa lo'e since
ti pixra lo simsa be lo'e since
works, I think.

Sure; but in that case, so would lo simsa be su'o since. Since we're 
using simsa, which is not mintu, we'd allow divergence of individual 
detail anyway.



And probably better:
ti pixra lo ckaji be leka since
or
ti pixra lo ckaji be lesi'o since

With the time-honoured proviso that this is {su'o no ckaji}, not {su'o 
da poi ckaji leka since zo'u: ti pixra da}. We still need to have 
pictures of made up entities.



And finally, for *real* usage:
ti since pixra

Ah yes. The Helsem solution.



Message: 15
Date: Fri, 27 Dec 2002 13:02:46 -0500 (EST)
From: John Cowan <cowan@ccil.org>
Subject: Jim Carter's view of masses, gadri

Here's Jim Carter's view of Loglanmasses:



Loglan has a concept of a "mass individual". According to Brown
[L1] it is more characteristic of non-Western cultures. Here is my
best explanation of it. Take the full referent set of an argument,
and personify it so that, potentially at least, it is the same
kind of thing as its members. For example, all sharks can be
considered to be instances or manifestations of an archetypical
shark god. This composite object is the mass individual. In
Loglan, arguments in the "serving or portion" category, like
"cutri-water", generally are used as mass individuals.

D00d (I've just been watching _Bill & Ted's Bogus Journey_), that... is 
the Unique! Now this is a pretty turn of events. The Unique is 
restoring Mr Shark to Lojban.



Btw, I have this right, yes?



lo karni is a physical object



lo karni peme'e la niu.iork.taims. is the physical thing you pay 25c 
for out of those vending machine thingies



Last Monday's New York Times is a Unique of all those physical things 
--- they are all physical avatars of the underlying one issue.



The New York Times in general is a Unique of the Unique (which is just 
a different Unique).



The Unique has individual properties. Therefore the Unique of the NYT 
has 100-odd pages, not a zillion.



I thought it might be interesting to see the Gua\spi list of

gadri as well. They come in pairs depending on whether individuals

or sets are intended (these being the two classes of things in 
Gua\spi's

rarefied ontology). Phonological note: Gua\spi "x" = Lojban "j";

Gua\spi "w" = English "ng" (velar nasal).



xe: in-mind individual(s)
xy: the set of in-mind individual(s)

le



xa: each individual
xu: the set of every individual

lo



xi: each individual, except (an/a few) atypical one(s)

xr: the set containing every individual, except (an/a few) atypical 
one(s)

Either Mode or Unique



Btw, I think this helps see what we can claim of the Unique, a 
legitimate concern Jordan raises. When Carlson defined his Kind, he 
first distinguished between indefinite plurals in English that are true 
of all their referents (Dogs breathe) and those true of most of them 
(dogs make good pets). The former is an individual plural: {ro lo gerku 
cu vasxu}. The latter is a generic statement: The Dog is a kind of 
animal that makes a good pet; sure there are exceptions, but in 
general...



So right now, to keep my own sanity, I paraphrase as follows:



Prototype(x) = x, by definition
Unique/Kind(x) = x, in general
Mode(x) = x, most of the time

Now, you'd expect people to be saying stuff of the Kind when they've 
actually got a reasonable sample of the population: the Kind should be 
based on the Mode. But the Mode is a rather strong claim to make.



Taking avatars and individuals as the model for individuals and kinds 
again: in most messages, Nick is fundie. In a thread or two, Nick is 
revisionist. Say each message represents a different avatar of Nick. 
Some avatars are fundie, some revisionist. If almost all avatars are 
fundie, you say Nick (the unique extracted from the avatars) is fundie 
(in general). If a non-negligible number of exceptions become salient, 
you change that to Nick is sometimes fundie and sometimes revisionist. 
That is subjective, true, but not completely arbitrary. Mode Nick 
doesn't help here, because most of the time Nick is neither fundie nor 
revisionist, he's asleep, transcribing wordlists, or proofreading his 
book.



xo: one or more individuals, it matters not which
xw: the set containing one or more individuals, it matters not which

... Intensional?



You mean, Carter got this right years two decades before we did? Aaargh!



(But did he allow quantification? So can you still distinguish between 
transparent and opaque with xa vs. xo?)



Message: 16
Date: Fri, 27 Dec 2002 18:53:11 -0000
From: "And Rosta" <a.rosta@lycos.co.uk>
Subject: RE: mei, latest cause celebre

I agree 100%, provided you also accept the corresponding def. of

"lojbanindividual", which is "natural individual or portion of 
substance"

(and I think this is in fact uncontroversial)

Yes and no. If djacu is perforce what you are calling 'substance'
then certainly lo djacu is a countable amount of substance. But,
following xod's lead we have defined 'Substance' as uncountable
(and I can't remember whether absence of constituent members, i.e.
noncollectiveness was part of the definition). So by our special
definition of Substance, lo never 'refers' to a substance, while
loi never refers to a countable individual.

Still don't get it. You are allowing that remna can be considered as 
uncountable (cf. pussy), and djacu as countable (portions). I presume 
you're saying that underlyingly, water is still a substance, whether 
you count portions or not, and people are still individuals up until 
the time you put them through the grinder, whether you ignore the 
distinctions between them or not? But that's a nicety and essentialism, 
surely.



Message: 18

Date: Fri, 27 Dec 2002 18:53:17 -0000

From: "And Rosta" <a.rosta@lycos.co.uk>

Subject: RE: fundamentalism as fundamental (RE: Re: gadri paradigm:2 
excellent proposals



John:
And Rosta scripsit:



A. Ultra-fundamentalist. CLL is gospel except where it can 
conclusively

be proved to be self-contradictory or to contravene inviolable 
principles

Okay: the intent was to contrast with Nick's variety of pragmatic
fundamentalism, which is manifest also sometimes in you. I suppose
that that can be summed up as "you needn't honour the letter so
long as you honour the spirit".

A little loose for me. My own take is, we subtract stuff only when 
self-contradictory or against the principles (intolerable ambiguity 
etc.); we add stuff somewhat more liberally, in the hope of 
forestalling the Academians.



Message: 19
Date: Fri, 27 Dec 2002 18:53:18 -0000
From: "And Rosta" <a.rosta@lycos.co.uk>
Subject: RE: gadri


It is distressingly clear that Lojban is shortchanged of any tools to
distinguish between collectives and substances, and I'll settle even
for gismu at this stage

{loi tu'o} does substances.
{lo tu'o} presumably does a countable amount of universal-grindee.
{lo PAmei} does countable collectives.
{piroloiro}, {pirolu'o} probably do uncountable collectives.

loi tu'o: substance
lo tu'o: portion of substance
lo PAmei: lojbanmass, sorry, we already tried that
piroloiro; singleton ('uncountable') collective
loi tu'o loi ro: substance of collective
PA lo piro loi ro: countable collectives
PA lo piro loi tu'o: countable masses (which is the same as PA lo tu'o)

In other words, {tu'o} erases the boundaries between members.
{lo} gives you countability. {loi} gives you uncountability.
Adding {piro} before {loi} makes sure you are actually referring
to {loi} and not to {pisu'oloi}.

How safely established is that last bit?



So... I think your wish is granted....

I'll wait on that; it's what I'd dearly want, but I'm waiting on a few 
more amens.



3. Unique
I wonder whether:

lo du be ro broda
lo du be ro (lu'a) le'i broda
lo du be ro (lu'a) la'i broda

would suffice (by the criteria that the BF uses to judge sufficiency)?

That's veridical, I see (as you say below). I think it's both clear and 
awkward enough for a new LAhE to be accepted anyway. New propaganda 
angle to push: Bring Back Mr Shark! :-)



I think we can simulate intensionals (that would cope with cases
where lV'i broda is empty) as:

le du be ro broda
le du be ro (lu'a) le'i broda
le du be ro (lu'a) la'i broda

... head's spinning. So from -spec -ver , you're now going to +spec 
-ver +unique . I want Mr Doctor (i.e. any avatar thereof), where Mr 
Doctor can be made up.



... Remind me why {mi djica loi mikce} was rejected as a general 
solution? Because whatever it was sinks this too, I think...



NB This message is meant as a contribution to SL not to AL. IOW,
the issue is "Can SL express the notion?", not "What means of
expressing this notion would satisfy our needs?".

Appreciated. This will encourage the kludge into being, I think (new UI 
or LAhE), rather than being the kludge itself.



Message: 20
Date: Fri, 27 Dec 2002 18:54:19 +0000
From: "Jorge Llambias" <jjllambias@hotmail.com>
Subject: Re: Digest Number 134


Herewith, the flame. This isn't necessarily about this in particular,
it's in general. In fact, I've toned it down enough that it's not
really a flame any more...

And thank you for your response. It's not what would delight me as a 
fundamentalist ("I accept that I am in sin if I do not follow the 
baseline"), but then the Organicists (Bob) never wanted that either. 
what we'll get is modus vivendi, and that's fine.



And if I'm concerned with my blood pressure, then I won't frequent this 
forum once the BPFK fora are up. :-)



Message: 21
Date: Fri, 27 Dec 2002 19:35:16 +0000
From: "Jorge Llambias" <jjllambias@hotmail.com>
Subject: Re: gadri


Thanks for the historical update. So things are indeed even worse than

I thought. The funny thing is, the MEX-obsesssed incompetence which

made tuples into math sets, and conflated tuples and masses, has also

saved the collective by introducing the cartesian product alongside 
the

set.

Are you talking about {pi'u}? How does it save the collective?
It is one of my never-use cmavo.

Sorr, got pi'u and jo'u confused. I still suspect jo'u was introduced 
in a maths-induced bender, without realising it reintroduced the tuple 
as distinct from the mass; but that's a historical matter.



And of course, drop the x1 .a x2 .a x3. Curses, foiled again.



Message: 22
Date: Fri, 27 Dec 2002 14:44:03 -0500 (EST)
From: Invent Yourself <xod@thestonecutters.net>
Subject: Re: Re: big rethink on Unique and other gadri

"mi nitcu lenu mi tavla lo mikce" becomes "da poi mikce zo'u mi nitcu 
le

nu mi tavla da". What other way is there to render it?

Wait, wait.



su'o da poi mikce zo'u: mi nitcu lenu mi tavla da (transparent, de re):
There is one doctor that I want to talk to

(Think of the outer prenex as a casting call, and a model-theoretic 
interpretation as a casting. If you want to talk to Dr Jay and not Dr 
Kay, you can truthfully say



pa da poi mikce zo'u: mi nitcu lenu mi tavla da



When the prenex is inside the proposition (opaque, de dicto), the 
casting call does not affect the contents of the embedded proposition, 
because the embedded proposition is its own world. So



pa ninmu cu djica lenu tavla pa mikce



is by default not:



pa da poi ninmu ku'o
pa de poi mikce zo'u:
da djica lenu tavla de

because, when the casting is held, you can plug in Ms May and Dr Jay, 
and say



la meis. djica lenu tavla la djeis. (to .enai la keis. toi)



But Ms May wants to talk to Any Doctor --- whether it's Jay, Kay, or 
Hay. So we get the doctor out of the prenex up front, and put it inside 
the embedded proposition:



pa da poi ninmu zo'u:
da djica lenu
pa de poi mikce zo'u:
da tavla de

When you interpret, you plug in Ms May:



la meis. djica lenu
pa de poi mikce zo'u:
da tavla de

But Dr Kay doesn't get plugged in. Because Dr Kay doesn't get the same 
casting call Ms May gets. In fact, the role of the doctor isn't cast at 
all: May just doesn't care who turns up. So, if Dr Kay does show up, 
she'll be happy. But she'll also be happy with Dr Jay showing up, or Dr 
Hay. So an interpretation plugging Dr Kay in misses the point.



The default interpretation of



pa ninmu cu djica lenu tavla pa mikce



is de dicto not de re: the doctor is not filled in by an actual value 
when the woman is, because the doctor is trapped in the twilight zone 
of "what I want to happen", rather than the real world. You couldn't do 
this with an extensional predicate, like



pa ninmu cu tavla pa mikce



By talking live to a doctor, even if he's hiding behind a Zorro mask, 
Ms May will know she's talking to a particular Doctor, not Any Doctor.



When we get into the stratosphere is when we introduce imagining. The 
doctor can be made up, and not exist in this world. You can need a 
six-letter gismu, and since there ain't no such thing, that's like 
saying you want nothing.



But! If the context is intensional, then you can make up a world --- 
with its own prenexes --- in which there is such a thing.



mi tavla lo pavyseljirna --- bull, there's no such thing, you're off 
with the pixies



mi djica lenu su'o pavyseljirna zo'u: mi tavla py --- yes: you want 
there to be a world (maybe this one, maybe not, such that there's a 
unicorn in it to talk to, such that you do talk to it.)



Message: 24
Date: Fri, 27 Dec 2002 18:42:30 -0500 (EST)
From: John Cowan <cowan@ccil.org>
Subject: Re: gadri

Thanks for the historical update. So things are indeed even worse than

I thought. The funny thing is, the MEX-obsesssed incompetence which

made tuples into math sets, and conflated tuples and masses, has also

saved the collective by introducing the cartesian product alongside 
the

set.

Can someone explain this tuples-vs-sets distinction to me? When I use

the word "tuple", I mean "ordered list of fixed but unspecified size".

Or is "tuple" being used here as a cover term for "duo, trio, quartet, 
..."

rather than "pair, triple, quadruple, ..."?

As usual, I don't know what I'm talking about.



My hang up is the fixed size bit, but the Lojban mantra is that usually 
collective sizes are not fixed.



So a duo singing is a lojbanmass. But singing is not an emergent 
property, since you can say the individuals sing.



Carrying a piano is duo which is a lojbanmass, because you can factor 
in or out the supervisor and the blind dude's guide. Carrying is an 
emergent property (because no one dude does it), but we don't have a 
fixed size tuple.



"Actually carrying", of laftygau, is properly a tuple: it's true of the 
pair of the blind dude and the seeing dude, and does not involve the 
supervisor and the guide.



A collective is a lojbanmass comprised if intact individuals, with 
potentially emergent properties, depending on the context (selbri)



A tuple (or whatever) is a collective where the selbri holds only of 
the collective and not of the component individuals: it's all emergence.



joi does Lojbanmass



jo'u and (at least today) loi ro do collective



The Nick-tuple may not be admitted to exist by anyone, and I fully 
admit that lots which we might think as done by Nick-tuple are really 
just done by Lojbanmass.



The Nick-tuple may well be just a set.





Message: 25
Date: Fri, 27 Dec 2002 23:50:11 -0000
From: "And Rosta" <a.rosta@lycos.co.uk>
Subject: RE: Digest Number 134


I have a slight reservation about this. If one must use inner
tu'o to get Substance (as we would like in AL), then all well
and good. But if {loi (ro)} can refer to substance then there
is no guarantee that {pi su'o loi ro} gives you a collective:
{pi mu loi ci broda nanmu} might give you, say, the bottom
halves of three people, or bodyparts totalling half the whole.

Well at least this ain't the universal grinder. Here, I'm more than 
happy to let pragmatics say we ain't doing this, but if we do, we can 
leave this to gismu:



loi nanmu poi ro cmima be lu'i ke'a cu mulno



loi nanmu poi su'o cmima be lu'i ke'a cu spisa



True, that's not a valid BPFK argument. It's still my defense
for my usage
Plus, the ethos back in those days, when Lojbab was a bigger influence
on the community, was Usage Decides. One was encouraged not to tinker
but to use.

One isn't being encouraged to tinker now either of course :-) . And 
also, as xod said, all travel into uncharted terrain is tinkering.



Bob will himself tell you (and he said it to the board) that he wasn't 
expecting Usage Decides to deviate from the baseline so wilfully and 
soon. So Bob's spirit is being followed here. I think what has changed 
is that there is a tangible fundamentalism in the community (I was 
never as vehement on it, I don't think, as Jay or Jordan); but the talk 
of baselines has always assumed a freeze and some period of adhering to 
the freeze.



The expectation was (and I believe remains, as far as Bob is concerned) 
that we can get away with leaving semantics to Usage; my current 
position is that we must leave less to Usage, since that's where all 
the real deviation will happen. The syntax. we're really not all that 
concerned with, and everyone is either adhering to it, or not realising 
they're deviating (I am unable to write grammatical Lojban, as you all 
will know.) But how to do an intensional reference? No, that shall no 
longer be left to usage, because leaving it to usage has resulted in 
lo'e and loi being conscripted for purposes they weren't intended for 
in CLL, and this is regarded as a problem to be solved, by, I think, 
everyone.



I don't plan to limit myself to whatever is defined as Standard
Lojban in my usage. Lojban belongs to its speakers, so it belongs
to me to the extent that I use it. (I would also assert that my
usage is no less standard than anybody else's usage, it only
gets labeled so because I discuss it and analyse it publicly, but
I'm sure we can find as many deviations from "the standard" in
everybody else's usage as well.)
Except they would probably say they were making mistakes, if they
could be brought to understand the nature of their error.

Excellent point. This is what I was alluding to when I said to xod "I 
don't like it that Lojban is turning into a language of flaggelators" 
--- which is what I do ("Oh, I didn't get intensionals! Woe betide me, 
I shall sin no more! Oh, I had no idea I should have used a termset! I 
shall sin no more! Oh, I don't want a specific event, but any event! 
May I be absolved!")



But... recognising error here also means I've learned something. I'd 
rather that...



[Nick Nicholas. French & Italian Studies, University of Melbourne 
]

[ nickn@unimelb.edu.au http://www.opoudjis.net 
]

[There is no theory of language structure so ill-founded that it 
cannot]

[be the basis for some successful Machine Translation. --- Yorick 
Wilks]

