# mail/lojban-list thread 92219cdf63ee-some_things_about_lojban | root uahl6c200uhbe20py3@andrew.cmu.edu | 2 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1990-05-14T20:14:32Z | Yary Richard Phillip Hluchan <wetblu!uunet!andrew.cmu.edu!yh0a+> | uahl6c200uhbe20py3@andrew.cmu.edu | mail/lojban-list/cur/642716072.92219cdf63ee61a2.jbomohi:2,S
I received the level 0 mailings about half a year ago.  I read them
over, took some notes, and wanted to post some observations-
unfortunatly I couldn't find this lists address, and now that I have it,
I've lost my notes! (In fact, I don't even have the level 0 mailing in
front of me. gismu are the basic words, that fit inside the places
defined by the lujvo, right? This is from memroy)

The mailing mentioned that there was some trouble with representing
mathematical concepts, but there was no description of the current
method.  Could you mail me a copy of the math grammar?

One big problem that I remember- and it would take a lot of work to fix-
is lojban's use of the postfix grammar.  If I remember correctly, the
reason postfix was chosen was to make machine interpretation easier,
since most machines used a stack-based architechture.  However, today's
machines don't need to store data structures on a stack; stacks can be
used but they're no easier to represent than a binary tree, an array, or
a DAG.  (In fact, I suspect it would be better to represent a block of
lojban text as a list of trees, with the lujvo at the root of each
tree... just a hunch).  If it is necessary to store the text as a stack,
it would be simple to parse from prefix to postfix.

Using the arguments above, there's no clear reason to prefer either
prefix or postfix notation.  So why go through all the work of rewriting
textbooks, etc to go with prefix?

Human comprehension: with the current setup, a person has to keep track
of up to five gismu before hearing how they fit together (the lujvo). 
Since most people have a short-term memory of about seven items, people
won't notice this as a problem.  With more complicated structures, there
are times when people go near the limit of their short term memory. 
Putting the lujvo first gives the reader a framework in which to place
the subsequent gismu.  Since the reader is now able to chunk the
incoming words together, s/he can understand the information easier.

Furthermore, putting the lujvo first might help a parsers error
detection.  If a lujvo is left out from a postfix stream, the parser
will not be able to detect the error until it reaches the next (not left
out) lujvo.  With prefix notation, the parser could immediatly see that
it had at least one gismu too many and flag it.   I am not too sure of
the language and place structures, though, so this may be wrong.

It would take a bit of work to convert from postfix to prefix, but I
think the long-term comprehension benefits would be worth the effort.


What do you think? I am sorry that I don't have the grammar rules here,
with some concrete examples I'm sure I could make a more convincing
argument.




=== 2 | 1990-05-15T17:21:23Z | wetblu!uunet!math.ucla.edu!jimc | 9005151721.aa29466@julia.math.ucla.edu | mail/lojban-list/cur/642792083.78030d9f7038042a.jbomohi:2,S
> Date:  Mon, 14 May 90 16:14:32 -0400 (EDT)
> To:  lojban-list%snark@uunet.UU.NET
> From:  Yary Richard Phillip Hluchan <yh0a+@andrew.cmu.edu>
> Subject:  Some things about lojban
   
> The mailing mentioned that there was some trouble with representing
> mathematical concepts, but there was no description of the current
> method.  Could you mail me a copy of the math grammar?

Just thought I'd mention this on the list: <lojbab> says that there
will be a review of MEX (math expressions) at Logfest, and I've almost
finished putting together a brief demo of -gua!spi MEX to show what can
be done with one particular kind of MEX grammar: not to have any! 
Functionals (like plus and derivative) take arguments using the same
syntax as is used everywhere else in the language.  In -gua!spi this
works well, though I'm not 100% sure it's best for Lojban.  In fact,
the requirement for default articles to make MEX compact was a major
influence on the non-MEX design of -gua!spi.  

I'll be sending it in to <lojbab>; anyone else wanting a copy should
send me mail.  I won't bother everyone with it since it isn't Lojban. 

> One big problem that I remember- and it would take a lot of work to fix-
> is lojban's use of the postfix grammar.  

Actually this isn't quite accurate.  In Old Loglan and in Lojban it has
always been legal to put all the arguments after the main phrase predicate.
The Institute grammar went to a lot of effort to allow just zero or one
argument before the predicate (neglecting "shifted arguments", which nobody
liked or used), but I found that the grammar was self-consistent with
arbitrarily many pre-arguments, and I believe (not sure) that Lojban
includes this feature.  Thus the main predicate can come before, among
or after the arguments, decorations and modal phrases.  

Since my native language is English I usually do Subject-Verb-Object in
the main phrase, but frequently, for style reasons, I will shift the
main predicate wherever I feel like putting it.  In an infinitive
(abstraction) I use post-arguments almost without exception.  

I interpreted the Old Loglan grammar as allowing arguments to have
pre-arguments, i.e. "le mi hasfa" means exactly the same as "le hasfa
je mi" because in both cases "mi" occpies the second case of "hasfa". 
(Not that JCB interpreted it this way...)  Similarly, JCB couldn't
manage to make this illegal: "le la kristoforo kolon botsu"
(Christopher Columbus' boat).  But obviously the prefix position for
the main word is much less ugly and much easier to understand. I don't
know if the current Lojban grammar allows arbitrarily many
pre-arguments in an argument -- I personally think that the grammar is
a lot simpler if you allow it but discourage use of the feature on
stylistic grounds.

> (In fact, I suspect it would be better to represent a block of
> lojban text as a list of trees, with the lujvo at the root of each
> tree... just a hunch).  If it is necessary to store the text as a stack,
> it would be simple to parse from prefix to postfix.

In truth, this is how I represent text in my -gua!spi parser-organizer.
When the tree is spanned, the execution stack of the program ends up with
a pile of recursive calls.  

		-- jimc


