# mail/lojban-list thread 5dcf6db902eb-initial_impression | root op.u5ydyzrne0p7z8@kobra | 4 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2010-01-03T10:55:39Z | "Klaus F. Abel" <kfa@gmx.net> | op.u5ydyzrne0p7z8@kobra | mail/lojban-list/cur/1262516139.5dcf6db902ebf16a.jbomohi:2,S
Dear friends,

A happy new year to everybody!

I just discovered this site and find it really exciting. As a computer  
programmer, the idea of a completely parseable human language sounds  
ingenious. I'll definitely want to learn more about Lojban.

My native language is German, I'm fluent in English and Esperanto, have  
basic knowledge in French, Spanish, Finnish, Russian, and got just a taste  
of Chinese.

 From an initial impression, regarding the chapter on alternative  
orthographies, it appears to me that development of Lojban is still in  
flux. Is that correct?

If yes, I hope it's not a complete heresy to sound off a few spontaneous  
dislikes which might put some people off getting friendly with it.

1. First, the usage of punctuation marks for pronounciation aides is  
confusing and looks simply ugly. Although this may sound subjective, the  
development of our various alphabets has come a long way also in the field  
of aesthetics. Therefore I believe that many would agree in an initial  
judgment about a language that deliberately ruptures the image.  
Punctuation ought to be reserved for marking various degrees of breaks and  
pauses in the flux of speech or thought - between words, not within. It  
adds structure to written text to make it easier on the eye - remember how  
it came about, most ancient and early medieval scripts did not use  
punctuation at all. Even if this language uses marker words in its stead,  
if you want it to be read by humans and not only by machines, you have to  
accomodate human perception to a degree. And the apostrophe represents an  
omission, either to indicate sloppy speech, to facilitate rhythm keeping  
in poetry, or the like. All these identifications are preoccupied and not  
easily unlearned.

2. If the apostrophe between vocals stands simply for a spoken 'h' sound,  
what's the point of not using the 'h' proper, especially since it is  
otherwise not used at all? The argument of better visibility and greater  
simplicity of the apostrophe is quite subjective and I can't find myself  
subscribing to it. In that case, why such a privilege for the 'h' sound  
over any other? Then a different alphabet should be developed with overall  
simper graphics, that would facilitate faster handwriting and easier  
recognizability than the Roman letters. Shavian or Shorthand are examples  
of such an endeavour.

3. Most irritating I find the full stop at the beginning of a word to mark  
the glottal stop where a word begins with a vocal. Most languages don't  
write the glottal stop at all, but I assume there is a good reason for it  
which I will discover when reading on. Maltese is an exception to this, it  
uses the 'q' for the glottal stop. As this letter also has been otherwise  
disused for Lojban, it seems just perfect to fill the spot.

4. Same goes for the comma in the middle of the word to separate vocals  
that do not form a diphtong. Again the 'q' would seem perfect in its  
place. This would introduce different pronounciation rules for the 'q'  
depending on its position, but sufficiently simple and unambiguous.

5. The forced adding of an 's' (or at least any consonant, if I understand  
correctly) to transliterated names that end on a vocal comes across to me  
almost as an act of violence against a sacrosanct name, I find it  
disturbing at best. Yet again the 'q' seems the ideal fit for the purpose  
of fulfilling the rule that it must end on a consonant. It would not alter  
the sound of the spoken name, since it would remain silent as the glottal  
stop at the end of a word is not pronounced (hardly doable at all). (Could  
this possibly create ambiguity in spoken language?)

An alternative for the silent consonant could be 'w', as it occurs  
sometimes in German (e.g. the name Pankow, a borough of Berlin, is  
pronounced "paŋkoː"). From this viewpoint it would be even better suited  
than 'q' to replace the midword comma as well.

But these issues are honestly just pristine feedback aimed at only serving  
the course. I am not aware of others having expressed similar or contrary  
thoughts. All in all, I can only laud this project and its creators,  
wishing you great success in the coming year, decade, and beyond.

Sincerely,

Klaus F. Abel


To unsubscribe from this list, send mail to lojban-list-request@lojban.org
with the subject unsubscribe, or go to http://www.lojban.org/lsg2/, or if
you're really stuck, send mail to secretary@lojban.org for help.


=== 2 | 2010-01-03T16:15:24Z | Seth <thirderivative@aol.com> | 8cc5aa7171dcae9-8fa8-1f578@webmail-d065.sysops.aol.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/1262535324.c0eac437d280bab8.jbomohi:2,S

 right on many points, my friend. welcome to Lojban, it is an amazing language. If you have good ideas for an improved orthography, design one. There have been several original orthographies produced, and more are always welcome until the community finds one they love.

seryf

 

 

-----Original Message-----
From: Klaus F. Abel <kfa@gmx.net>
To: lojban-list@lojban.org
Sent: Sun, Jan 3, 2010 3:55 am
Subject: [lojban] Initial impression


Dear friends, 
 
A happy new year to everybody! 
 
I just discovered this site and find it really exciting. As a computer programmer, the idea of a completely parseable human language sounds ingenious. I'll definitely want to learn more about Lojban. 
 
My native language is German, I'm fluent in English and Esperanto, have basic knowledge in French, Spanish, Finnish, Russian, and got just a taste of Chinese. 
 
 From an initial impression, regarding the chapter on alternative orthographies, it appears to me that development of Lojban is still in flux. Is that correct? 
 
If yes, I hope it's not a complete heresy to sound off a few spontaneous dislikes which might put some people off getting friendly with it. 
 
1. First, the usage of punctuation marks for pronounciation aides is confusing and looks simply ugly. Although this may sound subjective, the development of our various alphabets has come a long way also in the field of aesthetics. Therefore I believe that many would agree in an initial judgment about a language that deliberately ruptures the image. Punctuation ought to be reserved for marking various degrees of breaks and pauses in the flux of speech or thought - between words, not within. It adds structure to written text to make it easier on the eye - remember how it came about, most ancient and early medieval scripts did not use punctuation at all. Even if this language uses marker words in its stead, if you want it to be read by humans and not only by machines, you have to accomodate human perception to a degree. And the apostrophe represents an omission, either to indicate sloppy speech, to facilitate rhythm keeping in poetry, or the like. All these identifications are preoccupied and not easily unlearned. 
 
2. If the apostrophe between vocals stands simply for a spoken 'h' sound, what's the point of not using the 'h' proper, especially since it is otherwise not used at all? The argument of better visibility and greater simplicity of the apostrophe is quite subjective and I can't find myself subscribing to it. In that case, why such a privilege for the 'h' sound over any other? Then a different alphabet should be developed with overall simper graphics, that would facilitate faster handwriting and easier recognizability than the Roman letters. Shavian or Shorthand are examples of such an endeavour. 
 
3. Most irritating I find the full stop at the beginning of a word to mark the glottal stop where a word begins with a vocal. Most languages don't write the glottal stop at all, but I assume there is a good reason for it which I will discover when reading on. Maltese is an exception to this, it uses the 'q' for the glottal stop. As this letter also has been otherwise disused for Lojban, it seems just perfect to fill the spot. 
 
4. Same goes for the comma in the middle of the word to separate vocals that do not form a diphtong. Again the 'q' would seem perfect in its place. This would introduce different pronounciation rules for the 'q' depending on its position, but sufficiently simple and unambiguous. 
 
5. The forced adding of an 's' (or at least any consonant, if I understand correctly) to transliterated names that end on a vocal comes across to me almost as an act of violence against a sacrosanct name, I find it disturbing at best. Yet again the 'q' seems the ideal fit for the purpose of fulfilling the rule that it must end on a consonant. It would not alter the sound of the spoken name, since it would remain silent as the glottal stop at the end of a word is not pronounced (hardly doable at all). (Could this possibly create ambiguity in spoken language?) 
 
An alternative for the silent consonant could be 'w', as it occurs sometimes in German (e.g. the name Pankow, a borough of Berlin, is pronounced "paŋkoː"). From this viewpoint it would be even better suited than 'q' to replace the midword comma as well. 
 
But these issues are honestly just pristine feedback aimed at only serving the course. I am not aware of others having expressed similar or contrary thoughts. All in all, I can only laud this project and its creators, wishing you great success in the coming year, decade, and beyond. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Klaus F. Abel 
 
To unsubscribe from this list, send mail to lojban-list-request@lojban.org 
with the subject unsubscribe, or go to http://www.lojban.org/lsg2/, or if 
you're really stuck, send mail to secretary@lojban.org for help. 

 


=== 3 | 2010-01-03T17:21:15Z | Craig Daniel <craigbdaniel@gmail.com> | 55b258c21001030921o36fa5cf6s2b1047ca0ddca20c@mail.gmail.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/1262539275.a6d8bcf36139ad4c.jbomohi:2,S
On Sun, Jan 3, 2010 at 11:15 AM, Seth <thirderivative@aol.com> wrote:
>
> 1. First, the usage of punctuation marks for pronounciation aides is
> confusing and looks simply ugly. Although this may sound subjective, the
> development of our various alphabets has come a long way also in the field
> of aesthetics. Therefore I believe that many would agree in an initial
> judgment about a language that deliberately ruptures the image. Punctuation
> ought to be reserved for marking various degrees of breaks and pauses in the
> flux of speech or thought - between words, not within. It adds structure to
> written text to make it easier on the eye - remember how it came about, most
> ancient and early medieval scripts did not use punctuation at all. Even if
> this language uses marker words in its stead, if you want it to be read by
> humans and not only by machines, you have to accomodate human perception to
> a degree. And the apostrophe represents an omission, either to indicate
> sloppy speech, to facilitate rhythm keeping in poetry, or the like. All
> these identifications are preoccupied and not easily unlearned.

There are three; I'll address them individually below. But personally
I think once you get used to it (which only took me about two weeks)
they're really not so bad.

> 2. If the apostrophe between vocals stands simply for a spoken 'h' sound,
> what's the point of not using the 'h' proper, especially since it is
> otherwise not used at all? The argument of better visibility and greater
> simplicity of the apostrophe is quite subjective and I can't find myself
> subscribing to it. In that case, why such a privilege for the 'h' sound over
> any other? Then a different alphabet should be developed with overall simper
> graphics, that would facilitate faster handwriting and easier
> recognizability than the Roman letters. Shavian or Shorthand are examples of
> such an endeavour.

The difference between that sound and others is that, for purposes of
morphology, it is neither a consonant nor a vowel, and in fact
morphologically acts like it's not there. Far from greater visibility
than an h, the apostrophe as one of the smallest marks it is possible
to make manages to make itself scarce in a way that IMO fits its role
quite nicely.

Also, I don't really think of it as punctuation; lots of languages
have apostrophes in the middle of words, and in many of them it is a
consonant sound.

> 3. Most irritating I find the full stop at the beginning of a word to mark
> the glottal stop where a word begins with a vocal. Most languages don't
> write the glottal stop at all, but I assume there is a good reason for it
> which I will discover when reading on. Maltese is an exception to this, it
> uses the 'q' for the glottal stop. As this letter also has been otherwise
> disused for Lojban, it seems just perfect to fill the spot.

Many people treat periods as an optional formality, in part because
they look unpleasant to many of us. But we've found that the one in
the word ".i" in particular greatly improves readability - and, to be
frank, ".i" is basically a punctuation mark anyway.

My own opinion is that the most legible lojban uses periods, while the
most beautiful lojban does not; I've done a little lojban calligraphy
(...and I've been meaning to post about this on the wiki and haven't
done so) and normally eschew periods there because they are
unattractive - except that sometimes I include the one in ".i"

Also, a letter would be inappropriate for . because it isn't a
phoneme, but rather an allophonic rule about what vowels do at the
start of words. One of the key principles of Lojban orthography is a
single phoneme per letter.

> 4. Same goes for the comma in the middle of the word to separate vocals that
> do not form a diphtong. Again the 'q' would seem perfect in its place. This
> would introduce different pronounciation rules for the 'q' depending on its
> position, but sufficiently simple and unambiguous.

The comma is very ugly, and really ought to be avoided. It's only
found in names, and only those names that are sufficiently
un-lojbanified to need it; there seems to be an unstated sense that
"properly" lojbanizing your name includes making it work without
commas, probably because you and I are far from alone in disliking
them.

To me the comma is an un-lobykai equivalent of including foreign
diacritics in English names or w's in Spanish, both of which are
slightly jarring to come across. Sufficiently assimilated foreigners
in English-speaking lands nearly always drop their diacritics, and
when Spanish absorbs a word completely enough the spelling shifts
(hence "el váter" as the modern spelling of the word borrowed and
clipped from English "water closet"). Its inclusion in a word
instantly marks the word as being outside of the Lojban language, and
has little bearing on the aesthetics of proper Lojban.

> 5. The forced adding of an 's' (or at least any consonant, if I understand
> correctly) to transliterated names that end on a vocal comes across to me
> almost as an act of violence against a sacrosanct name, I find it disturbing
> at best. Yet again the 'q' seems the ideal fit for the purpose of fulfilling
> the rule that it must end on a consonant. It would not alter the sound of
> the spoken name, since it would remain silent as the glottal stop at the end
> of a word is not pronounced (hardly doable at all). (Could this possibly
> create ambiguity in spoken language?)

All names have to fit Lojbanic phonotactics already, so they cannot be
used as is (short of saying "la'o .zoi. This is a name that you can't
say in Lojban .zoi."). As for whether allowing names to end in vowels
could create ambiguity, the answer is yes. This ambiguity could be
prevented by putting constraints on names like those on type-4 fu'ivla
(heck, we could have our names *be* type-4 fu'ivla, so that
"kreigdane" means "x1 is Craig Daniel" or something), but this would
be worse - it would require all names to end in a vowel, so it
wouldn't really solve the problem, and it would put even greater
constraints on their shapes. Also, the slinku'i test (the test to make
sure putting a cmavo in front of a type-4 fu'ivla won't cause
ambiguity) is a little tricky, and since the first thing most people
do is Lojbanize their names, it's a good thing we don't insist on this
from every novice.

As for a silent consonant or a glottal stop, Lojban's goals as a
language would be betrayed by the breakdown of audiovisual isomorphism
required for the former, and the latter would require a different
phonology, one in which the glottal stop was a phoneme like any other
- which it isn't precisely because, as you note, there are many times
when it's difficult to pronounce.

> But these issues are honestly just pristine feedback aimed at only serving
> the course. I am not aware of others having expressed similar or contrary
> thoughts. All in all, I can only laud this project and its creators, wishing
> you great success in the coming year, decade, and beyond.

Welcome!

In time I'm sure you'll find that the language has its quirks, and
everyone's got one or two that bug them, but it's great fun anyhow.

mi'e .kreig.daniyl.


To unsubscribe from this list, send mail to lojban-list-request@lojban.org
with the subject unsubscribe, or go to http://www.lojban.org/lsg2/, or if
you're really stuck, send mail to secretary@lojban.org for help.


=== 4 | 2010-01-03T17:13:56Z | Pierre Abbat <phma@phma.optus.nu> | 201001031213.58222.phma@phma.optus.nu | mail/lojban-list/cur/1262538836.bd8b0beb5ac5cd4f.jbomohi:2,S
On Sunday 03 January 2010 05:55:39 Klaus F. Abel wrote:
> Dear friends,
>
> A happy new year to everybody!
>
> I just discovered this site and find it really exciting. As a computer
> programmer, the idea of a completely parseable human language sounds
> ingenious. I'll definitely want to learn more about Lojban.
>
> My native language is German, I'm fluent in English and Esperanto, have
> basic knowledge in French, Spanish, Finnish, Russian, and got just a taste
> of Chinese.
>
>  From an initial impression, regarding the chapter on alternative
> orthographies, it appears to me that development of Lojban is still in
> flux. Is that correct?
>
> If yes, I hope it's not a complete heresy to sound off a few spontaneous
> dislikes which might put some people off getting friendly with it.
>
> 1. First, the usage of punctuation marks for pronounciation aides is
> confusing and looks simply ugly. Although this may sound subjective, the
> development of our various alphabets has come a long way also in the field
> of aesthetics. Therefore I believe that many would agree in an initial
> judgment about a language that deliberately ruptures the image.

I use question marks as punctuation, and also quotation marks (though I'm not 
sure whether to put the quotation marks inside or outside the quotation 
words). I use the hyphen for abbreviation and the comma for splitting a word 
at the end of a line, since the comma indicates that there is no pause.

Some natlangs have idiosyncratic uses of punctuation marks. Biblical Hebrew, 
as pointed by Masoretes, uses just one punctuation mark and an assortment of 
cantillation marks which show the intonation of a sentence. Armenian uses ":" 
for a period and "." for a colon, and instead of putting a question mark at 
the end of a sentence, it puts a curlicue on top of the question word. Greek 
uses ";" as a question mark.

> 2. If the apostrophe between vocals stands simply for a spoken 'h' sound,
> what's the point of not using the 'h' proper, especially since it is
> otherwise not used at all? The argument of better visibility and greater

The sound /h/ behaves unlike other consonants in Lojban. It occurs only 
between vowels. A short rafsi has three letters, not counting the apostrophe.

> 3. Most irritating I find the full stop at the beginning of a word to mark
> the glottal stop where a word begins with a vocal. Most languages don't
> write the glottal stop at all, but I assume there is a good reason for it
> which I will discover when reading on. Maltese is an exception to this, it
> uses the 'q' for the glottal stop. As this letter also has been otherwise
> disused for Lojban, it seems just perfect to fill the spot.

Polynesian languages write the glottal stop with the okina, which looks like 
an upside-down apostrophe.

> 4. Same goes for the comma in the middle of the word to separate vocals
> that do not form a diphtong. Again the 'q' would seem perfect in its
> place. This would introduce different pronounciation rules for the 'q'
> depending on its position, but sufficiently simple and unambiguous.

Not unambiguous. "naqe" could be "na.e", which means "not ... but ...", 
or "na'e", which means "other than".

The thing about Lojban orthography that looks strangest to me is the capital 
letters for stress. I think that accented letters look better. That the 
orthography was devised before Unicode is, I think, the explanation for using 
caps.

Pierre

-- 
.i toljundi do .ibabo mi'afra tu'a do
.ibabo damba do .ibabo do jinga
.icu'u la ma'atman.


To unsubscribe from this list, send mail to lojban-list-request@lojban.org
with the subject unsubscribe, or go to http://www.lojban.org/lsg2/, or if
you're really stuck, send mail to secretary@lojban.org for help.

