# mail/lojban-list thread 6a86299fa562-dramatically_increase_customer_referrals_in_201 | root 8f6fa9d24538433a86714e1d001dfdeb@g2gm.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2010-02-13T15:39:22Z | Optimization Summits <optimizesum@g2gm.com> | 8f6fa9d24538433a86714e1d001dfdeb@g2gm.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/1266075562.6a86299fa5625dba.jbomohi:2,S [html]
Get
                        to Know Our
Rock
                        Stars!









People are the Killer App:
                        Lessons Learned from Creating Word of Mouth
                        Movements
Presented by Geno Church,
Brains on
                        Fire



Duct Tape Marketing: Using
                        Social Media to Generate Referrals
Presented
                        by John Jantsch, author of Duct Tape Marketing - The
                        World's Most Practical Small Business Marketing
                        Guide


Social
                        Media Strategy: Measurement & ROI
Presented
                        by Jason Falls, Social Media Explorer


Websites Designed
                        for
Real Time
Presented by John Pozadzides,
                        Chief Executive Officer, iFusion Labs


The Social Media
                        Ecosystem
Presented by Giovanni Gallucci, author
                        of Facebook Marketing An Hour a Day


Creating the Social
                        Org
Presented by Chris Boudreaux, author of Social
                        Media Governance, Empowerment with
                        Accountability

Social
                        Media Monitoring Tools
Presented
                        by Chris Boudreaux, author of Social Media Governance,
                        Empowerment with Accountability


Achieving Measurable
                        Results with Advanced Business Blogging
Presented
                        by Mark Roberge, VP Sales, HubSpot


Facebook
Presented by
                        Mike Whaling, 30Lines

Build An Awesome
                        Brand!
Presented by Jay Ehret, The Marketing
                        Spot



Beyond Facebook: Marketing
                        on Other Social Networks
Presented
                        by Mark Juleen, J.C. Hart Company, Inc.



Engagement: Content &
                        Audience
Presented
                        by Duncan Alney, Firebelly Marketing













The Most Valuable
                        Investment You'll Make In All of 2010.






You
                        probably know that the continued success of your brand
                        and business (not to mention dramatically increasing
                        customer referrals) depends on making Social Marketing
                        part of your overall strategy. What you probably don't
                        know yet is how to make that
                        happen.





Sure,
                        you could hire a consultant at around $1000 a day ...
                        but why do that when we've searched the country from
                        coast to coast to bring you more than a dozen of
                        America's hottest Social
                        Marketing Rock Stars!  Do your
                        Return-On-Investment the favor of a lifetime, join us in
                        Dallas on March 23-24, and spend TWO days with A DOZEN
                        or so of those $1000-a-day consultants for only around
                        $1000 IN ALL (travel, hotel, and incidentals included in
                        the math)!








See
                        It. Hear It. Do It. Learn With Rock Stars Like Jason
                        Falls, Giovanni Gallucci, Chris Boudreaux, John
                        Pozadzides, John Jantsch, Mack Collier and more, and
                        achieve Real-Time Results.





At
                        the Dallas 2010 Optimization Summit,
                        you'll experience learning by doing. You'll build your
                        own two-day curriculum out of flexible full-day,
                        half-day, and two-hour component workshops on Social
                        Media, all of which are carefully planned to build upon
                        each other progressively, and expand your understanding
                        and skill set exponentially. The knowledge you receive
                        will be continually reinforced by hands-on interaction
                        to make certain you have not just the knowledge, but the
                        know-how!  You
                        won't just listen ... you'll see, hear, and do.
                        Before you leave the event, you will design and
                        develop your own New Media solutions, and begin to
                        experience real-time results that will continue
                        to grow as you apply the solid strategies and
                        integration plans you'll develop.














Workshop
                        Spotlight - Duct Tape Marketing: Using
                        Social Media to Generate Referrals




Everyone's
                        buzzing about the awesome online global power of social
                        media tools, but few people focus on touting practical
                        ways to use social media to generate leads and referrals
                        for the local business. In this session, John Jantsch,
                        author of Duct Tape Marketing, will reveal practical
                        strategies and tactics that any small business can use
                        to leverage online social media tools to create deeper
                        customer relationships, valuable strategic partnerships,
                        local leads and ultimately more sales and
                        profits!












Workshop
                        Spotlight - People
                        are the Killer App: Lessons Learned from Creating Word
                        of Mouth Movements




Authentic,
                        sustainable word of mouth marketing is one of the truest
                        forms of brand communication, and it can't be
                        manufactured or bought.  And yet, as more
                        institutions dedicate marketing dollars to assemble word
                        of mouth and buzz marketing programs, how can you build
                        an effective, meaningful movement for your brand that
                        will directly impact your bottom line?  How can you
                        identify those brand advocates already speaking out on
                        your behalf, and work with them to develop a natural
                        two-way word of mouth program?


Geno Church
                        from identity company Brains on Fire will explain how
                        word of mouth marketing works and how it doesn't,
                        providing techniques on how you can start to identify
                        movement-building opportunities for your brand, with
                        authenticity and clear measurement results in mind. He
                        will highlight successful WOM case studies, including
                        data from the just launched Best Buy Musical Instruments
                        movement and the nationally-recognized Fiskars Brands
                        'Fiskateers' movement, as well as talk about ways to
                        define
                        ROI for your word of mouth marketing
                        programs.












2010
                        Optimization Summit -
                        Dallas







March
                        23-24, 2010
(with
                        Meet & Greet on March 22)
Sheraton,
                        Dallas, TX

Early
                        Bird Registration is $304 For a Limited Time
                        Only!
(Regular Pricing is $429)
Use Offer
                        Code: VIP to save $125 on Registration!

Register
                    Here






















Please Unsubscribe
        Here
