# mail/lojban-list thread b2cb4f26ab1b-hello | root 1740585.5041266747389761.javamail.root@webmailbox103.eircom.net | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2010-02-21T10:16:29Z | Asset Liability Managerial Company <aoifemmor@eircom.net> | 1740585.5041266747389761.javamail.root@webmailbox103.eircom.net | mail/lojban-list/cur/1266747389.b2cb4f26ab1bba34.jbomohi:2,S
Dear Friend,

I work as an international auditor for a reputable Bank (ALM) Asset Liability Managerial department monitoring five branches including Singapore, Belgium and Netherlands. I have taken pains to find your contact through personal endeavors which I may explain to you upon your response.

A possible family member of yours (name withheld for security reason) died nine months ago leaving behind an investment totaling a very tidy sum with my bank. With interest at today's value, the said investment has grown considerably.

His lawyer has since notified my department of the sudden death of the said investor in a car crash and the lawyer has also asked us to check through our records to see who his client may have indicated as next of kin to the investment, since the fiance (Derby Myrthe) who was indicated in his WILL as beneficiary to most of his properties also died in the same car crash.

Findings and verification as auditor in the bank has led me to realize that the investor has also named his fiance as next of kin to the investment.

We have as yet not informed anyone of this because of the implications, the investor's lawyer will obviously handover his properties including the investment to the government which will in turn be shared amongst undeserving government officials.

However, because of the relevance of the sameness of your surname and you being a possible relative to the late investor, we are making you this proposal since my boss and I can provide you with much needed information to claim the investment.

You are guaranteed that this will be executed under a legitimate arrangement that will protect you from any breach of the law, as the funds did not originate from terrorism or drugs, but through inheritance.

Please kindly reply through my private email (adriaenbrouwer@aol.com) to confirm your full name, telephone and fax number to enable us discuss and facilitate all due process regarding this transaction.

Yours truly,
Adriaen.


---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This communication, together with any attachments hereto or links contained herein, is for the sole use of the intended recipient(s) and may contain information that is confidential or legally protected. If you are not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that any review,disclosure, copying, dissemination, distribution or use of this communication is STRICTLY PROHIBITED. If you have received this communication in error, please notify the sender immediately by return e-mail message and delete the original and all copies of the communication, along with any attachments hereto or links herein, from your system.


