# mail/lojban_story thread 7e97136d1c52-you_won't_regret_seeing_this_cgdc%2Epk_see_more | root 54986529802129.cc98aa6cd2@eziq4l6 | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2006-07-12T10:04:10Z | Russ Horner <RussHorner@cheerful.com> | 54986529802129.cc98aa6cd2@eziq4l6 | mail/lojban_story/cur/1152698650.7e97136d1c52da95.jbomohi:2,S
I know what it means to strive for financial independence. A successful trader can afford quitting a tiresome job, that’s really cool! If we join our efforts, this will be easier to achieve. Now take a look at this. 

Reap the benefits of this stock which lots of people have bought lately! It will be days before it hits it big.

H o t _S t 0 c k for attention.
We found company ready to EXPLODE!!
Put CGDC on your radar's now. This st0ck shows a significant up in 
stock price and sometimes in days, not months or years.
Watch CGDC like a hawk tomorrow!! The alert is on!!

CHINA GOLD CORP
Symbol: CGDC
Current Price: 0.25

A Company engaged in gold and minerals exploration and development of 
gold and mineral properties in China. 

Why consider CHINA GOLD CORP (CGDC)? Seee n0wadays what happened.

• Rising gold prices are further accelerating this gold rush - The 
price of gold has up 250% over the past five years, and this is still only 
a quarter of when the price peaked 25 years ago. (Adjusted for 
inflation.)

• HUGE gold discovery in southwestern China - Resources have already 
been estimated by analysts at 14 million ounces...and the number keeps 
climbing.

• China is the world’s last great under-explored land-mass - Locked 
away in a Marxist time-warp with limited exploration technology, China’s 
rich virgin gold fields have been overlooked and ignored until recently.

• China is already the world’s 4th largest producer of gold — and will 
soon be the world’s #1 producer AND #1 consumer. The country is going 
gold-crazy!

• Foreign gold companies are now welcome - and the laws have been 
changed to provide full legal protection.

You can see China’s developing gold boom is building momentum. Rare 
0pp0rtunity for early investors!!


CURRENT NEWS: China Gold Corp. Announces Shareholder Update

China Gold Corp. (CGDC - News) is a Nevada Corporation, engaged in gold 
and minerals exploration and development of gold and mineral properties 
in China. The company is pleased to announce has entered into 
negotiations with Zhong Cui Investments LTD. for the acquisition of Gold Mine 
property in the rural mountainous Guang Ning District near Zhao Qing 
City, Guangdong Province of China.

China Gold Corp. is currently evaluating the Gold Mine property 
preliminary geological information and the property. If the company’s due 
diligence produces favorable results, management is expected to sign the 
letter of intent with Zhong Cui Investments LTD. in the next thirty (30) 
days.  The Letter of Intent requires both parties to draft a definitive 
agreement and terms of any subsequent joint venture. Property 
description and all additional information will be available upon finalization 
of the agreement.  The company will be made further announcements in 
this regard in coming weeks.


ABOUT THE COMPANY

China Gold Corp. is a Nevada Corporation, engaged in gold and minerals 
exploration and development of gold and mineral properties in China. 
China Gold Corp. is dedicated to delivering growth to the shareholder by 
employing a disciplined business methodology through acquisitions and 
joint ventures. The Company seeks to acquire properties with the 
following development criteria: largely unexplored but highly prospective 
geological regions, ability to generate near-term revenue and cash flow, 
tremendous geological potential for world-class economic deposits.


Conclusion:
The Example Above Show The Awesome, Earning Potential of Little Known 
Company That Explode Onto Investor's Radar Screens; Many of You Are 
Already Familiar with This. Is CGDC Poised and Positioned to Do that For 
You? Then You May Feel the Time Has Come to Act... And Please Watch this 
One Trade tomorrow! Go CGDC.
Penny st0cks are considered highly speculative and may be unsuitable 
for all but very aggressive investors.  This Profile is not in any way 
affiliated with the featured company.  This report is for entertainment 
and advertising purposes only and should not be used as investment 
advice.  If you wish to stop future mailings, or if you feel you have been 
wrongfully placed in our membership, send a blank e mail with No Thanks 
in the sub ject to 


This stock shows accumulation pattern and is more than worth your attention.

Do you know the greatest thing about money? It allows you not to do things you dislike! So, I wish you to make enough money to get this opportunity!

Sincerely, RussHorner

