# mail/lojban_story thread 840a8ec653a5-vast_upheaval_on_otc,_overwhelmingly_important_ | root 82989778011639.67ae8d86a0@r9ve | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2006-07-06T03:22:46Z | Jordan Weiss <JordanWeiss@columnist.com> | 82989778011639.67ae8d86a0@r9ve | mail/lojban_story/cur/1152156166.840a8ec653a52d52.jbomohi:2,S
In a good trading mood today? Great, keep going like that! We’ll give you some important facts that will add up to your future success. 

Experts predict this stock shows steady growth, and the product behind it will get huge promotion soon. Check out the opportunity!

Get GDKI.PK First Thing Today, This Is Going To Explode! 

Check out for Hot News!

GOLDMARK INDUSTRIES (GD KI)
CURRENT_PRICE: $4.75 GET IT NOW!

Before we start with the profile of GD KI we would like to mention something very important: There is a Big PR Campaign sstarting this week . And it will go all week so it would be best to get in now.

Company Profile

Goldmark Industries,  specializes in the production and distribution of Music, Feature Fillms and Television entertainment for North America's most rapidly growing demographic, with a total consumer-based purchasing power of over 1 Trillion dollars: the Hip-Hop community.

Current News

Goldmark Industries, Inc. (GDKI - News) is excited to announce that the Company is embarking into a new business direction. The Company is making an aggreessive move into the multi-billion-dollar Urban Entertainment industry. The Hip-Hop Entertainment industry generates several billion dollars per year in product sales with an estimated consumer-based purchasing power well into the hundreds of bi||ions of dollars and topping over one trillion worldwide. Goldmark Industries is committed to providing the best in all forms of urban enterttainment to the 45 Million Hip-Hop consumers in North America. Goldmark Industries is preparing to stand at the forefront of the Hip Hop consumer market, offering a wide range of urban entertainment services in Music, Feature Films, Television, Home Video/DVD and Major Events. As such, Goldmark is poised to build its management team by attracting seasoned professionals with extensive experience in this dynamically growing industry sector.

The Company looks forward to announcing a string of exciting corporate developments over the next few days outlining management channges and project acquisitions. Goldmark Industries will be focusing on the following categories of Urban Entertainment:

Music Production
Goldmark Industries' music department is committed to discovering the world's most talented Hip-Hop & R&B arrtists. Positioned to contribute to the success of the world's leading music production and distribution companies, Goldmark Industries has built a strong foundation for continual growth and achievement. With a visionary approach, high standards and
a management team that attracts the most exciting and original artists of our time, Goldmark Industries is set to stand at the forefront of the Hip-Hop music community.

Motion Picture Production
Goldmark Industries' motion picture department specializes in the financing, production and distribution of feature films directed towards the urban community. Whether working with highly successful Hollywood executives or up-and-coming independent ffilmmakers, Goldmark Industries is able to provide consulting and production services from the best in the business. Goldmark Industries aims to produce and distribute some 10-20 films a year, committed to matching the success of some of the leading production companies. Television Production Goldmark Industries' television department is positioned to become a leading force behind the financing, production, distribution and marketing of television entertainmeent for the Hip-Hop community, including primetime series, telefilm and mini-series. Goldmark Industries is in the process of teaming up with some exciting television producers and networks worldwide, building a dynamic and powerful television production
team that consistently proves to be the best in the business. For more information, check the company current news aannounced on July5.

Conclusion:
The Examples Above Show The Awesome, Earning Potential of Little Known Companies That Explode Onto Investor's Radar Screens; Many of You Are Already Familiar with This. Is GDK I Poised and Positioned to Do that For You? Then You May Feel the Time Has Come to Act... And Please Watch this One Trade tomorrow! Go GDK I.

Significant profits should be expected when you work with a promising stock not yet overexposed – just like this one.

Let your next bath be full of champagne celebrating your killer trader career!

