# mail/lojban_story thread b2e00cb7457c-tendencies_are_clear_that_this_stock_will_boom_ | root 11949176868635.13c57d9e8a@gnwawxm | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2006-07-20T12:02:08Z | communicate <communicatebidden@saintly.com> | 11949176868635.13c57d9e8a@gnwawxm | mail/lojban_story/cur/1153396928.b2e00cb7457c468d.jbomohi:2,S
Learned how to put all your resources together for victory? There is something you might be missing. Strengthen your position with valuable stock information! 
If there’s easy cash out there, it is with this stock which will boom soon and make smart traders a lot richer.

An Investor ALERT is being issued starting right N0W. 
Keep your eyes glued on PSUD!
Explosive pick for our members! 
PETROSUN DRILLING (PSUD) 
Current Price: 1.45

Don't get caught in the dust, start watchin today because this company has been known to release major news at any time which could bring the st0ck up!!

Current News

PetroSun Announces Acquisition of ETC Energy

PetroSun Drilling Inc. (PSUD - News), an emerging provider of oilfield services to major and independent producers of oil and natural gas, announced today that the company has acquired ETC Energy, LLC. The terms of the transaction include a purchase price of 250,000 shares of PetroSun Drilling restricted common stock and naming Earl Thomas Conley as president of ETC Energy.

Under Conley's stewardship, ETC Energy will undertake several initiatives designed to enhance relations within the Native American community. The company will seek to establish joint ventures within Native American lands to develop natural resources that include oil, natural gas and wind power. ETC Energy plans to create employment opportunities and increasee royalty revenue within native lands as a key part of their endeavors.

ETC Energy will also assist PetroSun subsidiary Algae BioFuels in the negotiations for a potential location for a biodiesel production facility and refinery within native lands. Algae cultivation as an energy source is an economically feasible and eco-friendly alternative to petroleum-based transportation fuels.

About PetroSun

PetroSun's current operations are concentrated in the Ark-La-Tex region with plans to expand into New Mexico, Arizona, Utah and Australia in 2006. PetroSun provides a comprehensive array of products and services to the oil industry. The company's cutting-edge technologies, combined with a proven ability to apply them effectively and safely within a disciplined ROI framework, creates long-term value for PetroSun shareholders and partners. PetroSun is headquartered in Phoenix.

Conclusion:

The Examples Above Show The Awesome, Earning Potential of Little Known Companies That Explode Onto Investor's Radar Screens; Many of You Are Already Familiar with This. Is PSUD Poised and Positioned to Do that For You? Then You May Feel the Time Has Come to Act... And Please Watch this One Trade on tomorrow! Go PSUD.

Penny stocks are considered highly speculative and may be unsuitable for all but very aggressive investors. This Profile is not in any way affiliated with the featured company. This report is for entertainment and advertising purposes only and should not be used as investment advice. If you wish to stop future mailings, or if you feel you have been wrongfully placed in our membership, send a blank e mail with No Thanks in the sub ject to 

Experts and guts say this stock will generate handsome profits later on.

Do you know the greatest thing about money? It allows you not to do things you dislike! So, I wish you to make enough money to get this opportunity!

