# mail/lojban-list thread c4a6095548bd-verifying_llg's_current_bylaws | root 5e04bb30-1271-4e0b-b80a-0ab189b652fe@googlegroups.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2014-08-30T03:37:54Z | mukti <shunpiker@gmail.com> | 5e04bb30-1271-4e0b-b80a-0ab189b652fe@googlegroups.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/1409369874.c4a6095548bdda4e.jbomohi:2,S
The 2003 annual meeting 
<http://www.lojban.org/tiki/LLG+2003+Annual+Meeting+Minutes> appears to 
have passed a number of bylaw amendments, but not all amendments appear to 
be reflected in the current text of the bylaws 
<http://www.lojban.org/tiki/Bylaws+of+The+Logical+Language+Group,+Inc.> as 
posted on the lojban.org web site. The minutes are not always clear about 
what is being passed or amended, and make numerous references to an agenda 
which is not reproduced, so it's possible that I am misreading them. 

I will describe what I see as the potentially successful amendments below. 
If someone can provided additional context to clarify whether or not these 
motions in fact constitute successful amendments to LLG's bylaws, please do 
so.

mi'e la mukti mu'o

----

1. An amendment to Article 3 Section 8:

The phrase "proposal and approval of new members, who shall assume 
membership immediately if present at the next meeting" should read 
"proposal and approval of new members, who shall assume membership 
immediately if present at the current meeting"


This successful motion is described as an addendum, but the meaning of that 
distinction is not clear. It is preceded in the minutes by an apparently 
unrelated failed motion to amend Article 5 Section 2.

2. The following succcessful motion does not make explicit reference to 
amending the bylaws, but was considered during a portion of the meeting 
which seems to have been devoted to bylaw amendments:

That a new office be created, effective 2004, which can only be filled by a 
Virginia resident. The office has no duties in particular. Holding the 
office is compatible with holding another office or directorship


Article 4 Section 1 specifies: "at least one (1) of such Directors shall be 
a resident of the Commonwealth of Virginia" -- which seems to express a 
similar requirement, but may or may not be related to this motion.

3. An amendment to Article 3 Section 8:

That The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure, in its most recent 
version, be the Parliamentary Authority for the LLG (where not specifically 
overruled by the Bylaws, Articles of Incorporation, or relevant laws and 
statutes) 


This motion *does* appear to have been incorporated in the current text of 
the bylaws, superseding a bylaw amendment passed by the 1996 annual meeting 
specifying "Standard Parliamentary Code 3rd edition".

4. Motion 9G3 ("to allow electronic communication for LLG official 
purposes"). Since the minutes describe the motion as having been 
"reconsidered", I assume the text may have been included in an earlier 
motion which failed on initial consideration:

That all references to postal mail, telephone, and electronic mail 
throughout the bylaws be removed in favour of completely generic terms such 
as "notify" and "reasonable and customary forms of communication", unless 
they are specific exceptions to the principles of the section on 
Communications (such as a specific need for written notification)


5. An amendment to Article 3 Section 1:

Qualifications of both new and ongoing membership shall be high personal 
dedication to the purposes of The Logical Language Group, Inc as set forth 
in that Article, expressed interest in helping to manage the affairs of the 
community, continuing involvement in the activities of the community, and 
attendance at the AGM. Failure to satisfy some of these conditions is not 
necessarily a disqualification from membership, if some of the other 
conditions are satisfied to a sufficiently high degree 


This motion is described as a "friendly amendment" to a motion to add 
"continuing involvement" to the list of qualifications for LLG membership. 
That motion appears to have been amended such that it was demoted to a 
"resolution of principle rather than a bylaw amendment". However, the 
amendment that contains this text follows the motion which converted the 
previous bylaw amendment to a resolution. I assume that the quoted text is 
intended to amend the resolution of principle rather than the bylaws, but 
given other doubts, I'm asking for clarification.

6. An amendment to Article 3 Section 1:

To add "or demonstrated participation in the Lojban language language 
community" to the list of qualifications


This motion is likewise described as a "friendly amendment", following a 
bylaw amendment motion which was demoted to a "resolution of principle". 
However, the motion it follows in the minutes appears completely unrelated: 
A motion possibly related to Article 3 Section 3, "To amend the Bylaws to 
allow the Board to declare the resignation of a member for failure to meet 
the qualifications for sustaining membership if so ratified by the 
membership".

7. An amendment to Article 2 Section 1:

To add "to support the community of people learning and using this 
language" and "In the furtherance of its purposes as stated above, The 
Logical Language Group, Inc. shall place priority on support of the 
community of persons learning, using, experimenting with, and promoting the 
language known as "Lojban language - A Realization of Loglan" or 
alternatively 'Lojban'." to the statement of purpose of the LLG


-- 
You received this message because you are subscribed to the Google Groups "lojban" group.
To unsubscribe from this group and stop receiving emails from it, send an email to lojban+unsubscribe@googlegroups.com.
To post to this group, send email to lojban@googlegroups.com.
Visit this group at http://groups.google.com/group/lojban.
For more options, visit https://groups.google.com/d/optout.

