# mail/lojban-list thread 018585a673b0-functions | root 199712251143.gaa27581@locke.ccil.org | 5 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1997-12-25T11:43:44Z | Robin Turner <robin@BILKENT.EDU.TR> | 199712251143.gaa27581@locke.ccil.org | mail/lojban-list/cur/883050224.018585a673b0b6ee.jbomohi:2,S
Now that the grammar has been baselined and the Book is out, .e'u the
luminaries of Lojban concentrate their attention on functional Lojban.  The
string on tea and coffee, although sometimes hard to follow (at least for a
beginner like me) has been worthwhile because it is an attempt to discuss
how you might actually _do_ something in Lojban, like ask someone to choose
between two alternatives.  Obviously we can't prescribe functional language
(a lot of which is in any case culturally specific) but it would be useful
to throw up a range of choices, and then let natural selection take its
course.  Then when the draft textbook becomes the Textbook, these can be
incorporated.

My main criticism of the draft textbook as it stands is that it's largely a
step by step journey through the refgram.  If we want to produce a textbook
that is a practical guide to Lojban, then it needs (pace Austin) to
concentrate more on "how to do things with words" - such as ask someone a
"whether" question, for example.  This would also require substantial
changes in the "syllabus" - this is the only language textbook I have come
across where you don't get to numbers until Chapter 10!  This is not to
belittle the textbook, which I think does a reasonable job at what it sets
out to do (i.e. present the grammar and semantics of Lojban in a digestible
way) but since any future readers of the textbook will also (.a'o) have a
copy of the Book, they need to be offered something different, i.e. a
course that will enable them to start communicating in Lojban as soon as
possible.  After all, I don't start teaching English to beginners by
explaining English sentence structure, I start with things like "Hi, how
are you?" li'a teaching/learning a conlang like Lojban is going to be
different from learning a natlang - mu'a you wouldnt need to spend much
time on how to do your shopping in Lojban - but I still think we can learn
a lot from second-language pedagogy here.


Robin Turner

Bilkent Universitesi,
IDMYO,
Ankara,
Turkey.

<http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Delphi/8309>



=== 2 | 1997-12-26T13:29:14Z | Logical Language Group <lojbab@ACCESS.DIGEX.NET> | 199712261329.iaa22946@locke.ccil.org | mail/lojban-list/cur/883142954.f39c1371d4307179.jbomohi:2,S
>My main criticism of the draft textbook as it stands is that it's largely a
>step by step journey through the refgram.  If we want to produce a textbook
>that is a practical guide to Lojban, then it needs (pace Austin) to
>concentrate more on "how to do things with words" - such as ask someone a
>"whether" question, for example.  This would also require substantial
>changes in the "syllabus" - this is the only language textbook I have come
>across where you don't get to numbers until Chapter 10!  This is not to
>belittle the textbook, which I think does a reasonable job at what it sets
>out to do (i.e. present the grammar and semantics of Lojban in a digestible
>way) but since any future readers of the textbook will also (.a'o) have a
>copy of the Book, they need to be offered something different, i.e. a
>course that will enable them to start communicating in Lojban as soon as
>possible.  After all, I don't start teaching English to beginners by
>explaining English sentence structure, I start with things like "Hi, how
>are you?" li'a teaching/learning a conlang like Lojban is going to be
>different from learning a natlang - mu'a you wouldnt need to spend much
>time on how to do your shopping in Lojban - but I still think we can learn
>a lot from second-language pedagogy here.

The draft textbook was largely written before the refgrammar was even conceived,
and hence is not a setep by step journey thorugh the latter.  Actually only
the incomplete chapter 1 is intended to be preserved in any form in the final
book, and is rather a more complete explication of the material in Chapter
2 of the refgrammar thna of the whole book.  Essential is more examples of
different kinds and exercises based on those examples.

The textbook does need "useful" Lojban, but its essential function is to
provide lots of examples and exercises, some of which are embeeded in longer
texts to provide context.

I do not expect that the textbook will necessarily include a
conversational phrasebook at the beginning like it seems many 2nd language
books for English speakers do.  The textbook is supposed to teach you how to
leanr the language, and the conversational niceties are not necessarily part
of the best learning method.

The last outline of the draft textbook had one long intro lesson, then 9 or
10 shorter lessons covering specific features of the language while building up
vocabulary - this number will probably be expanded though - and then some
additional lessons that cover "usage" and "trabslation" issues.

More recently, my efforts at studying Russian have greatly changed my
philosophy of 2nd language learning, but I have not yet returned to the
textbook to revise the plan.

I HAVE done a lot of reading in 2nd language pedagogy - enough to know that
most practitioners admit that there seems to be no magic bullets in terms
of pedagogical methods for learning a language.  Lojban is a special problem
in that we cannot provide "native speaker moidels", most learners are acquiring
the language on their own through self-study rather than in a classroom with
others and a knowledgeable (ideally fluent) instructor, and the goal is not
generally spoken fluency.  We need to tailor the textbook methods to our
expected audience.

It is not clear yet whether we can write the book so as to require the reader
 toalso hasve the refgrammar at hand.  I tried this once before - the first
version of the book skipped phonology and told people to read what is now the
phonology and morphology chapters of the refgrammar.  They didn't.

lojbab
----
lojbab                                                lojbab@access.digex.net
Bob LeChevalier, President, The Logical Language Group, Inc.
2904 Beau Lane, Fairfax VA 22031-1303 USA                        703-385-0273
Artificial language Loglan/Lojban: ftp.access.digex.net /pub/access/lojbab
    or see Lojban WWW Server: href="http://xiron.pc.helsinki.fi/lojban/"
    Order _The Complete Lojban Language_ - see our Web pages or ask me.



=== 3 | 1997-12-26T16:54:11Z | Robin Turner <robin@BILKENT.EDU.TR> | 199712261654.laa27291@locke.ccil.org | mail/lojban-list/cur/883155251.8dc43c8a772dd559.jbomohi:2,S
la lojbab.cusku di'e

>I HAVE done a lot of reading in 2nd language pedagogy - enough to know that
>most practitioners admit that there seems to be no magic bullets in terms
>of pedagogical methods for learning a language.

.iesai  Although I have now moved into the slightly more rarified
atmosphere of English for Academic Purposes, I well remember the furious
methodological arguments we used to have in the staffroom.  There is now,
however, a general consensus that a syllabus needs to balance structural,
functional and notional approaches - va'i learning the grammar of the
language, learning to do things in it (e.g. ask questions, offer advice,
make requests) and talk about various subjects in it.

>Lojban is a special problem
>in that we cannot provide "native speaker moidels", most learners are
acquiring
>the language on their own through self-study rather than in a classroom with
>others and a knowledgeable (ideally fluent) instructor, and the goal is not
>generally spoken fluency.  We need to tailor the textbook methods to our
>expected audience.

.ie  Perhaps one solution is to act as though native speakers existed.
Alternatively, we could assume a speaking situation where none of the
participants are native speakers of Lojban, but are native speakers of
different languages using Lojban as a lingua franca.  Obviously learing
solo is different from learning in a class, though a'o the latter will
eventually occur more.  Also learning styles vary enormously, so there is
no magic bullet here either - personally I rather like the old-fashioned
teach-yourself books where the first chapter is entitled "The Grammar", but
I'm almost certainly unusual in this respect.

As for the goal not generally being spoken fluency, well this may not be an
immediate goal for such a widely-scattered community (I'll be happy if I
ever manage to write a decent e-mail in Lojban) but surely it is one of the
long-term goals (otherwise why would we have all those phonological
rules?).  I am not suggesting a Lojban phrasebook, but the type of simple
conversational Lojban found in parts of the refgram and draft textbook is
useful, I think. Given, though, that most Lojban at the moment is written,
a lot of the examples should be letters, e-mails, stories etc.

Finally, some suggestions for the textbook:

1.  As much Lojban and as little English as possible.
2.  A chance to work out the rules before explaining them.
3.  A wide variety of exercises (cloze, multiple choice, dialogue
completion etc.).
4.  Plenty of functional stuff i.e. how to do X in Lojban.
5.  Plenty of vocabulary.
6.  An accompanying cassette with Lojban dialogues (optional).
7.  Lots of pictures!
8.  Versions in other languages than English.

If and when work on the textboook resumes, I would be very willing to
contribute. OK, my Lojban is pretty minimal at the moment, but I do have a
lot of expeience of writing language-learning materials.

co'o mi'e robin.


Robin Turner

Bilkent Universitesi,
IDMYO,
Ankara,
Turkey.

<http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Delphi/8309>



=== 4 | 1997-12-27T15:58:21Z | Logical Language Group <lojbab@ACCESS.DIGEX.NET> | 199712271558.kaa20533@locke.ccil.org | mail/lojban-list/cur/883238301.239427ebaa8caf99.jbomohi:2,S
>As for the goal not generally being spoken fluency, well this may not be an
>immediate goal for such a widely-scattered community (I'll be happy if I
>ever manage to write a decent e-mail in Lojban) but surely it is one of the
>long-term goals (otherwise why would we have all those phonological
>rules?).

One can want to be able to converse in Lojban, without trying for accentless
fluency.  The detailed phonological tules serve in lieu of that native speaker
model that we don't have.

>I am not suggesting a Lojban phrasebook, but the type of simple
>conversational Lojban found in parts of the refgram and draft textbook is
>useful, I think.

We will obviously have that kind of text at least as much as we have now.
The question is whether it should be an emphasis or not, when most people
studying the language will not use more than a few conversational elements.
(I have to also admit that I am prejudiced by having studied both Spanish
and German by memorizing ALM dialogues. 30 years+ ago, and I still can say
in German "Will you come with me to the library?  and a couple of lines
after that, but cannot use that trivial knowledge productively because that
is ALL the German I know.  What I remember of Spanish is absolutely NONE of
the ALM stuff, but rather a bunch of words that I learned from context (and
how to count) in a 1st grade after-school "Spanish club".  Ever since then,
I have seen "dialogues" as a worhtless torture, except insofar as it provides
lnaguage use in context (albeit highly stilted context).  Conversational
usages allow for more use of idioms and certain vocabulary items than prose
does, but unless you have the number of students to enact the dialog, it is
a pain to make use of them pedagogically.
>Given, though, that most Lojban at the moment is written,
>a lot of the examples should be letters, e-mails, stories etc.
.iesai
Indeed, the reason why the textbook work was stopped was simply because I am
NOT a very creative person, and it is VERY hard work for me to even come uo
up with the volume of "original and interesting" Lojban text that the current
 draft textbook has.  Actually, most of THAT was written by Nora too, so it is
two peoples output of Lojban text.  I couldn't produce the volume of examples
I thought were needed then, and nowadays I think my goals weren't ambitious
enough by a factor of 10.

Unfortunately, most of the LOjban that gets written is translations using
"difficult" constructions it seems.  It is very difficult to write within a
constrained vocabulry and constrained grammar constructs.

>1.  As much Lojban and as little English as possible.

.ie on the Lojban
.iecu'i on the English, except that more Lojban requires less English %^)

I have been self-teaching Russian using much the same techniques that I
imagine most Lojban learners will have to use - with limited contact with
good speakers and users, and I know the value ofan immersive quantityt of
examples.

>2.  A chance to work out the rules before explaining them.

I'm not hot on this one.  I never managed to glean anything useful
from this without LARGE volumes of text.  I certainly learned no basic
Russian grammar rules from this - once I had the basics down, I may have
gleaned the cases of a couple verbs from context, but I don't think I
learned them any faster having learned them by observation.  Actually
the grammar lessons I leanred best were those  that I learned after
doing them wrong  for months based on my own grokking, and then having them
corrected by someone who knew better.  What I have learned without rules,
is by reading LOTS of Russian aloud, I have acquired a fairly naturalrhythm
of the language and hence can guess at stress correctly more often than not,
 despite the fact that Russian stress is more or less irregular and I have never
seen any rules for predicting it.  But this took LOTS of text,more than I would
expectto find in a textnbook.

>3.  A wide variety of exercises (cloze, multiple choice, dialogue
>completion etc.).

.iesai, if only for maintaining interest.  The problem of course is that
many exercises used in basic books for pedagogical purposes are teaching things
like grammatical paradigms.  Lojban has relatively little of the sort of thing
that gets taught bythese kind sof examples.  As a result, I found it especially
hard to concoct varied examples.  Most of what we need people to learn
in the first X lessons is LOTS of vocabulary, and my experience is that

by the time most people have even memorized 250 words, they have a command
of the grammar sufficient tosay almost anything IFF they have the vocabulry.

The only things difficult about the language are the "advanced topics" involving
 things like tu'a and ce'u that have no natlang correlate.  I have no idea how
to teach that stuff, and I can say from personal experience (as you have perhaps
witnessed in my arguments with And and Jorge), grokking the rules from the
examples that have appeared seems to lead only to misunderstanding.  (I

>4.  Plenty of functional stuff i.e. how to do X in Lojban.

We don't know how to do anything in Lojban until we try it, and then wehen
we do, it seems to turn into a complex mess with very unintuitive rules.
I am VERY wary of putting the kinds of discussions that we have regarding
translation problems in a beginning textbook.  And unfortunately,most f the
simple "how to do" functional stuff is either trivial and unrevealing, or
it opens up the most sophisticwated on logical problems.

>5.  Plenty of vocabulary.

Yep.  But at what rate.  Most 1st year college level textbooks aim at around
1200 words by the END of the first year.  Which means 300 words after the first
quarter.  We have some obvious word choices - avoid lujvo, for example - but
which 300 words are most useful to learn first.

>6.  An accompanying cassette with Lojban dialogues (optional).

We already have this, but the order of the material on the tape matches the
original draft textbook order, and Cowan reordered the material when he broke
the 6 draft lessons up into 22.

>7.  Lots of pictures!

We don't have money for graphics artists, and I am not pareticularly
skiled in searchingout the kindof public domain clip art that would be
useful in a textbook.  This is the least likely of your suggestions to be
implemented.

>8.  Versions in other languages than English.

This requires people to translate large volumes of text.  You also have to
choose the right language.  We can most easily find translators into
Esperanto, butI am unconvinced that there is a lot of audience for
Esp[eranto textbooks in Lojban.  Second easiest to find is Spanish
translators, but we haven't recrtuited many Spanish-native Lojbanists (Jorge
being the stellar exception). We seem to have atracted small communities in
Sweden and Italy, but thus far only among English speakers there of course.
There is latent interest in Russia, and their culture values language learning,
but translating a book into Russian will be very diffiult.

And the bottom line is that, excludingthe English-dominated net, we cannot
economically publish books for the non-US market unless we can getthat market
MUCH larger than it currently is.  We are at considerable risk with the
 refgramas to selling enough cpies to break even.  We'll have learned some
 lessons by
the time of the textbook publishing, but still, in the volume of sales we are
taling about, getting the price below $30-40 will not be easy.  And selling
a break-even number of books in another language at that price seems to be a
pipe dream at this point.

>If and when work on the textboook resumes, I would be very willing to
>contribute. OK, my Lojban is pretty minimal at the moment, but I do have a
>lot of expeience of writing language-learning materials.

The thing we need most, and it can start now, is lots of examplesa and text
using relatively limited vocabulary and only simple grammar.

lojbab
----
lojbab                                                lojbab@access.digex.net
Bob LeChevalier, President, The Logical Language Group, Inc.
2904 Beau Lane, Fairfax VA 22031-1303 USA                        703-385-0273
Artificial language Loglan/Lojban: ftp.access.digex.net /pub/access/lojbab
    or see Lojban WWW Server: href="http://xiron.pc.helsinki.fi/lojban/"
    Order _The Complete Lojban Language_ - see our Web pages or ask me.



=== 5 | 1997-12-29T05:33:42Z | Logical Language Group <lojbab@ACCESS.DIGEX.NET> | 199712290533.aaa16314@locke.ccil.org | mail/lojban-list/cur/883373622.3acd19a56fe9de6d.jbomohi:2,S
>It sounds like it's about time for a word frequency study of existing =
>text.  The tricky part would be that it would be most useful to count =
>rafsi and their associated gismu together, and to properly break up =
>compound cmavo (i.e. lenu -> le nu).

There is frequency data up until three years ago when I stopped
keeping up with my mail.  There is separate frequency data on rafsi used in
lujvo, both proposed and in actual usage, but this has not been combined
with frequency sata for the lujvo themselves.

The gismu frequency data is given in the gismu list itself, as a number
starting approximately in column 160.

lojbab
----
lojbab                                                lojbab@access.digex.net
Bob LeChevalier, President, The Logical Language Group, Inc.
2904 Beau Lane, Fairfax VA 22031-1303 USA                        703-385-0273
Artificial language Loglan/Lojban: ftp.access.digex.net /pub/access/lojbab
    or see Lojban WWW Server: href="http://xiron.pc.helsinki.fi/lojban/"
    Order _The Complete Lojban Language_ - see our Web pages or ask me.


