# mail/lojban-list thread a63b7909af03-simple_lojban_questions | root 199709282326.saa10068@locke.ccil.org | 2 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1997-09-28T18:26:42Z | Andrew Sieber <absieber@eos.ncsu.edu> | 199709282326.saa10068@locke.ccil.org | mail/lojban-list/cur/875471202.a63b7909af03b79d.jbomohi:2,S
Hello all-  I haven't learned Lojban yet, but I plan to sometime in the
near future.  I've only spent a couple hours glossing over the reference
grammar, and I've got a few questions about the language.

In English, if I say, "The first time I met my wife was in high school,"
I am most likely referring to the person who is now my wife, but she was
not, of course, my wife while I was in high school.  However, the
English sentence is strictly interpreted as meaning that I was already
married to her before I even met her, and the first time I met her was
in high school.  Is it possible to say something ambiguous like the
above in Lojban, or does Lojban force you to choose which meaning you
intend?

Why can't selbri be the first word in a bridi?  If the selbri were
first, then a listener could immediately know what relationship is being
described, and could know what each sumti was being used for as the
sentence was being heard.  Allowing the selbri to be the last word in a
bridi forces a listener to retain a potentially long string a sumti in
short term memory until the selbri is finally heard, at which point the
listener must mentally fit together all of the sumti just heard, placing
a large burden on the listener for all but very short bridi.

"skami pilno" can mean a user of computers, or it can mean a computer
that is also a user.  Why is this ambiguity allowed in a supposedly
unambiguous language?  Also, as I understand it, "sampli" has a definite
meaning, unlike the ambiguous "skami pilno".  Are such lujvo always
unambiguous, or are they only unambiguous when they happen to be
specifically defined in the dictionary?  If they are always unambiguous,
what is the method used to decide which "interpretation" will be
correct?

Does Lojban have separate words for the nucleus of an atom, the nucleus
of a biological cell, the nucleus (kernel) of a computer operating
system, etc?  If so, does it have a general word that means "the center
or middle part of something" that is not used to refer to the middle of
any one specific thing?

Does Lojban have separate words for the metric prefixes for base two and
base ten numbers?  Ie. in English, "kilo" can mean 1000 or 1024, "mega"
can mean 1000000 or 1048576, etc, and the correct meaning must be
figured out from the context.  Does Lojban resolve this ambiguity?

Is there any information anywhere about letter frequency in Lojban?  The
reason I ask is that I am currently considering learning the Dvorak
style keyboard layout to replace qwerty (which I currently use), due to
the fact that it is almost universally considered superior to qwerty in
terms of typing speed, accuracy, and comfort.  However, if I begin
typing a lot of Lojban in the future, the Dvorak style may not be
optimum; after all, Dvorak designed his layout to be optimal for the
English language.  Also, of course, another issue is the fact that
Dvorak placed the letters h, q, and w in (relatively) easy to reach
places on the keyboard, and Lojban does not use these letters at all.

If anybody can provide answers, please do so.  Thanks.

--Andrew Sieber
absieber@eos.ncsu.edu



=== 2 | 1997-09-29T12:11:34Z | "John E. Clifford" <Pycyn@AOL.COM> | 199709291711.maa14145@locke.ccil.org | mail/lojban-list/cur/875535094.3f3e38f0b1f95438.jbomohi:2,S
My wife before she was.  _le_ selects on the basis of your intended
reference, regardless of whether the predication fits, so using it to refer
to someone in the past who later became works perfectly well.  Or use _lo_
(predicate does fit) but tense it for future (-but-not-at-reference-point).

Selbri-first sentences have a special use in Lojban (observatives, I think,
"Hey look at...).  However, the effect you want can be achieved by putting
any of a number cmavo (tense, e.g., or attitudinals or...) in first and then
going on.  "Normal" SVO order seems the best compromise (to me, a speaker of
a language where it really is normal) and SOV seems hard, yet many languages
manage (even German according to a whole series of jokes about waiting for
the verb).

As we keep saying, ambiguity freedom in Lojban is *syntactic* ambiguity only,
semantic ambiguity is useful for many pruposes, even simple conversation. So
_skami pilno_ means "computer user" pretty much the same range of
ambiguities.  This can be disambiguated in a variety of ways if need be
(putting an "and" between to show that the subject is both or putting the
"computer" part explicitly in second position, for example -- other moves are
possible).  Lujvo are unambiguous when they are introduced, even before they
enter any dictionary -- the coiner has the responsibility for defining the
full structure.  Some attempts have been made to regularize this process, but
little of this effort has been generally accepted.

Nuclear words.  Yes and yes, but don't ask me what they are, right off the
top of my head (or maybe some have not yet been created).

Metric words - yes, a full set.

Letter count.  Something like this was done for the basic words -- gismu and
cmavo -- but nothing for running text, so far as I have seen.  Dvorak
keyboards will almost certainly not be particularly advantageous in Lojban.
 Nor much of a problem neither.


