# mail/lojban-list thread ab7ad24c88f1-your_subscription_to_list_lojban | root zp_vskmu89c.a.dsc.q90klb@chain.digitalkingdom.org | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1992-09-17T02:44:12Z | Revised List Processor <LISTSERV%CUVMB.bitnet@YaleVM.YCC.YALE.EDU> | 190e87d477518adc66f55242fcf7ed6b1fd3e2ae@jbomohi.invalid | mail/lojban-list/cur/716697852.209afc8b30cf60b4.jbomohi:2,S
Dear networker,

  Your subscription to list LOJBAN (Lojban list) has been accepted.

  Note: your  distribution options have been  defaulted as per the  "SET LOJBAN
NOACK MAIL NOFILES NOREPRO SHORTHDR" command.

                        Welcome to Lojban List!

If you haven't already done so, please send us a postal address (including your
full name)  so that we  can add  you to our  postal mailing list.  This address
should be sent to lojbab@grebyn.com. Thanks.

                        What is Lojban List?

Lojban List is a LISTSERV-based mailing  list for discussion of the constructed
human  language "Lojban  -  A  Realization of  Loglan"  and  for informing  the
electronic community about logical languages in general. It is sponsored by the
Logical Language Group, Inc (LLG), a non-profit tax-exempt organization. LLG is
funded  solely  by contributions,  which  are  encouraged  for the  purpose  of
defraying its costs, but are not mandatory.

                Who should post to Lojban List?

Everybody! Lojban List  is not only for  novices, nor for experts,  nor for the
LLG leadership, but for everyone with access to electronic mail and an interest
in Lojban.

Beginning Lojbanists  tend to pose questions  about the goals of  the language,
specific ideas  they may have about  how a language can  be 'logical', question
about the availability and suitability  of materials to support their interests
and goals, and questions about how Lojban handles presumably difficult features
of natural language.

Once Lojbanists have received our  published materials, they post questions and
comments about  those materials, challenge  design features and goals  that are
not well explained, pose translation questions,  or even try to post an attempt
to translate a sentence into Lojban, for comment by the group.

More experienced  Lojbanists of course  respond to  these comments in  light of
previous discussions. They also pose  more deeply challenging design questions,
and attempt more difficult translations.

Finally,  the  leadership   of  the  Logical  Language   Group  monitors  these
discussions, answering questions which are not  answered by others on the list,
reporting on language development progress,  proposals for language change, and
upcoming events. This leadership consists of  people who have chosen to involve
themselves strongly in  Lojban's development -- new Lojbanists  have joined the
"inner circle" within months of their arrival.

        Is it all right to post stupid questions to Lojban List?

No  question is  stupid on  Lojban  List, and  many new  ideas and  significant
discussions have  stemmed from seemingly  obvious points, from  trivial seeming
translation attempts,  or simply new points  of view. The mix  of readership is
constantly  evolving,  and  'old'  questions  lead  to  new  answers  with  the
experience of new observers and language students.

The development of  Lojban has been influenced by ideas  and contributions from
hundreds of people  with an enormous variety of interests.  No other artificial
language has had the same scope of contributors to its design. These ideas have
been applied to the standards and goals  of the language, and many of them have
been  incorporated,  to the  benefit  of  all who  study  Lojban.  Lojban is  a
community language project.

                        How do I post?

1) To post a message to Lojban List, send it to:

        lojban@cuvmb.cc.columbia.edu or lojban-list@snark.thyrsus.com

The use of the second address is DISCOURAGED and may go away in future.

2) To remove yourself from Lojban List, send a message to:

        listserv@cuvmb.cc.columbia.edu

whose body consists of the single line:

        unsub lojban

3) To temporarily suspend your subscription to Lojban List, send a message to:

        listserv@cuvmb.cc.columbia.edu

whose body consists of the single line:

        set lojban nomail

4) To resume a suspended subscription, send a message to:

        listserv@cuvmb.cc.columbia.edu

whose body consists of the single line:

        set lojban mail

5) To get help from a human being, send mail to:

        lojban-list-request@snark.thyrsus.com

Lojban List is made possible with  the kind assistance and cooperation of Jerry
Altzman,  sysadmin of  hebrew.cc.columbia.edu,  and Eric  Raymond, sysadmin  of
snark.thyrsus.com.

                How do I reach the Logical Language Group?

Send postal mail to:

        Bob LeChevalier, President,  The Logical Language Group  2904 Beau Lane
        Fairfax VA 22031-1303 U.S.A.

or call:

        (703) 385-0273 (North America) +1 703 385 0273 (elsewhere)

or send electronic mail to:

        lojbab@grebyn.com

Virtually,

   The LISTSERV management


