# mail/lojban-list thread e7bd27d62ce6-lojban_coffeeshop | root your message of "fri, 21 aug 92 13:09:31 -0400." | 2 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1992-08-22T15:04:31Z | cbmvax!uunet!mullian.ee.mu.oz.au!nsn | 9208221332.aa29424@relay1.uu.net | mail/lojban-list/cur/714495871.14f3b2d3b5dfd4f4.jbomohi:2,S
Lojbab:
>I'm going to ask that people not go too far away from the original idea
>without getting their agreement (which I suspect is not too likely), or the
>resentm,ent (already significant) of non-netters toward the domiantion of
>Lojban by net people will grow, which noone wants.

Not that I could supplement Veijo's perceptive response to this (we're hardly
a community, and we're already splintered), but yes, there's resentment on
both sides, and we'll all have to work to smooth that out, to get a unified
Cafe Jbolaz out of this.

>The plan is that there be 1 coffeshop, and that the description be suitably
>refined in English.

Cool. Veijo's navigation of Virtual reality can be done once the description
is in place, and the description should not be exhaustive.

>People will develop refined descriptions of 6 characters
>(or some other number if we abandon the 6 cultures idea - but I don't think
>you can have a 'cultureless person' and have the character detail that I think
>the others want in the shared characters)

I think it's perfectly possible, but then, I think we're also looking for
different things in character definition. What maketh a Hindi speaking
character? I know personally 3 native Hindi speakers: two Engineering
students and a Law student, one from Fiji, one from Singapore, one local.
Now what do I extract from them to create, say, la jbosanjiv. , and
what am I mising by virtue of the fact that I talk with these people in
English, within an Anglo culture? If these characters aren't assimilated
into some medium we're familiar with (regrettably or not, this'll have to
be a more or less anglo cultural medium --- leave the "or less" part to
us na'e glico) they'll be caricatures. And of course, as background, they
don't have to be that detailed anyway.

If we're to avoid a palace coup, sure, keep them Hindi and Arabic in name;
but don't expect the character description to be too adamant about their
cultural identity. Exoticising these people is unsatisfactory. They *will*
be somewhat assimilated, into be it merko or jbomerko. This is nothing
to be ashamed of. Talking about the Arab's fiery temperament or the
Russian's cool intellect as cultural traits would be.

>If people think they can develop interesting culture-free characters, I for
>one will await the first posted character description meeting the challenge.

I'm going to get back to you on that one... I suppose what we all need is
a character description we can shoot down, otherwise I don't think any
of us really know what (concretely) we are talking about.



=== 2 | 1992-08-23T00:29:05Z | lojbab@grebyn.com | 9208230029.aa24055@daily.grebyn.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/714529745.e084c9d980863662.jbomohi:2,S

I don't think that the people off net are necessarily locked into the 6 
cultures idea.  But they did sound very committed to the idea of these
common characters being deftned is considerable detail, IN ENGLISH, 
before people started to write in Lojban.  The desire for detail and for E
English, as well as the clear desire for people to go beyond philosophy and
into specific detailed descriptions of people and the coffeeshop itself,
is what I was trying to urge.  It was MY idea that the best way to show
Hindi cuoture is my having some Hindi-inspired Lojban stylistics, etc.  I
think the original people posing the idea were thinking more along the
lines of having the chef of the day specialize in cooking foods of his/her
native culture (for which we would need lots of lujvo and le'avla in order
to have the foods recognizable, if then).  Thus I thought that stylistics
of Lojban would be a more creative way to go, people will recognoze the
exoticness of the non-standard forms, and maybe even learn a little linguistics
about the differences in the languages based on the Lojban forms.  But I
do not see that we have to go too extreme to bona fide culture, especially if 
people don;t think they can pull it off.  And if people don;t want to use
the 6 culture labels, I suspect this will fly, but only if the characters are
defined well enough that people writing feel they 'know' the characters
either fully, or in terms of any cultural features/stereotypes/whatever
that would be most noticed by your everyday lojbo wandering in for a cup of
coffee.

I don;t think that there is a 'splintering' between the non-netters and the 
netters.  But my responsibility is to see that one doesn't come about.  I
fully feel Veijo's isolation in not being able to come to LogFest, not to 
mention your own.  And we are working ever more to find ways to minimize the
distance.  But there are plenty of people in th US who feel just as distant
as you do.  Karen Stein, who I was thinking of when I cautioned people
yesterday, lives 250 miles from here, and has no interface with other lojbo 
EXCEPT at LogFest.  250 miles is as bad as 8000 miles when you cannot
bridge the gap  (she IS by the way trying to get on net, but has not done so
yet).


