# mail/lojban-beginners thread a67e4043f9de-from_dennis_and_glory_kabba%2E | root 1d62ba7fb1382fe14a1b67306938a882.squirrel@webmail.tec.ac.ke | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2010-03-07T19:02:48Z | Dennis Kabba <urgent_help55@cantv.net> | 1d62ba7fb1382fe14a1b67306938a882.squirrel@webmail.tec.ac.ke | mail/lojban-beginners/cur/1267988568.a67e4043f9de1220.jbomohi:2,S



FROM DENNIS AND GLORY KABBA.
REPUBLIC OF COTE-D'IVOIRE

Greetings ,

We are Dennis and Glory the children of Late General Ernest Kabba the
former Director of military inteligence and special acting General Manager
of the Sierra Leone Diamond mining coperation( SLDMC ). We are contacting
you to seek your good assistance to transfer and invest USD 14.5 million
U.S dollars belonging to our late father which is deposited in a bank here
in Abidjan.

This money is revenues from solid minirals and dimonds sales which were
under my fathers possession before the civil war broke out. Following the
break out of the war, almost all government offices,coperations and
parastatals were attacked and vandalized.

The SLDMC was loothed and burnt down to ashes,and diamonds worth millions
of dollars was stolen by the rebel military forces who attacked our
fathers office, many top government officials and senior army officers
were assasinated and our father was a key target because of his very
sensitive military possition and appointment in the SLDMC.Regreatably, our
father was captured and murdered along with his brother in cool blood
during a mid-night rebel shoot-out when our official residence in freetown
was armbushed by Fordey Sanko the notorious rebel leader. Our mother
sustainded very sever bullet injuries which resulted to her untimely and
painful death in a private hospital here in Ivory Coast.

Now we are alone in a totally strange country without parents, relatives
or any body to care for us at our tender ages. Before our mother died, she
told us that our father deposited some money which he made from diamond
sales and contracts in a bank here in Ivory Coast and that we should pray
and find a trust worthy foreign business partner who would help us to
transfer and invest this money in profitable business venture overseas.

She told us to do this quickly so that we can leave Ivory Coast and then
settle down abroad. She gave us the bank document to prove the deposit and
then told us that our father used my name as the only son to deposit the
money in the bank.She told us that this is the reason why we came to Ivory
Coast. My mother died after wards. May her spirit rest in perfect peace.

I have gone to the bank to make inquires about this money and I spoke with
the Manager of International remittance who assured me that everything is
intact and promised to help us transfer this money to my fathers foreign
partners bank account as soon as we provide our fathers partners foreign
bank account for them. However, the manager is very concerned because of
our age,  and advised that we should look for a matured person that will
represent me at the bank.

If you are willing to assist us, please let us know immediately so that
you will arrange the transfer of the money to your account with the
bank.Please note that we will offer you 10% of the total money as
compensation for your noble assistance in accodiance with my mothers
advise. I am interested in any profitable commercial venture which you
consider very good in your country and you would also get a school for me,
my little sister so that we can finish our college education.

Please there is urgent need for the money to be transferred to your
account because of the political crises they are having in Cote d'Ivoire
now. We are hoping to hear your urgent response so that we will not look
for another person.

Thank you and may God bless you and your dear family.

Yours sincerely
Dennis and Glory Kabba.



