# mail/lojban-beginners thread d910b453dc6a-miss_georgina_hanriado | root 107363.71426.qm@web27602.mail.ukl.yahoo.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2010-01-08T04:17:57Z | georginahans2000 hans2000 <georginahans2000@yahoo.co.uk> | 107363.71426.qm@web27602.mail.ukl.yahoo.com | mail/lojban-beginners/cur/1262924277.d910b453dc6a46a8.jbomohi:2,S
Miss georgina hanriado
Dakar Senegal,West Africa.

Good Day My Dearest,  


I'm very sorry to bother you with my E-mail.But I want you to understand that I truely need your assistance to this great offer I'm  offering  you from the source of my mind.Before anything I want to use this opportunity to introduce myself.
My name is Miss georgina hanriado,  I am 24 years old from Rwanda,I am the only daughter of my parents. My father died on Brutal war by the Rebels  on the Renewed Fighting in our country, and my sick mother at hospital where she was admitted for  Cancer treatments, she also gave up when she heard about the news of the death of my father in two days time and hospital where she was (General  Hospital here in Rwanda),may their gentle soul rest in perfect peace.


I escaped and found myself in this country called Dakar Senegal I am residing inside refugee camp in Dakar Republic  as i do not have anybody  nor family to take care of me,please if you can adopt me as your Child or business partner if possible and manage this money for me.
my father is Directors  of Star Energy Group plc. who deal on crude oil and raw material. The main reason why I am contacting you now is to seek  your assistance in the area of our better future living and investment of huge sum I have here in my name the sum of ( $9.5M ) (Nine million,  five hundred thousand United State Dollars) my late father deposited  for safe keeping under Finance company, in my name for safe keeping to me.  Now at his death,and because things have become very hard for me taking care of my needs, so, I write to the Finance company  where this money  was deposited.


I was shocked when the Manager of the Finance company explained to me that I will not be able to withdraw from the money because am a  refugee,and the Manager of the Finance company told me to seek for someone that will help me, in the claim as i am a refugee by status,that is  reason why I am contacting you to stand for me and claim this money on my behalf.I will need your assistance in this regard please. I will  provide all necessary documentation of my late father to show the Finance companyand as soon as I hear from you I will send you the Finance company contact information, so you can contact the  Finance company  for the payment of   the  money in to your   Account.


I hope that we shall discuss how you want remunerated when you get back to me.For my part, I shall be more than willing to part with 20% of the  total sum to you while 10% will be mapped out for any expenses to receive the money from the Finance company where this was deposited that is to  let you know that you will help me with your honest mind to enable me get the necessary documents that would back this deal.


Yours Truly,
Miss georgina hanriado    



      
