!!Collation
The current LaTeX export of the dictionary sorts output in ASCIIbetical order. This means that all uppercase letters comes before any lowercase letter, and that longer words come before shorter words.

There exists working code that sorts the headwords in the standard order, but that has not been incorporated into the main codebase. If you don't like that, talk to our nice LaTeX guy, [http://www.miranda.org/~jkominek/!Jay Kominek].

!!How to find the translation of an English word
If you find a Lojban word that you are not familiar with as the translation of the English term you have looked up, you should always check the definition of the Lojban word to be absolute sure that it is the one they need.

But in general, we have tried to choose English keywords so that the following is possible:
* If the English keyword is a noun, and the Lojban translation is a brivla, "lo" followed by that brivla should be a reasonable translation of that noun.
* If the English keyword is a proper noun, and the Lojban translation is a cmene (cmevla), "la" followed by that cmene should be a reasonable translation.
* If the English keyword is a verb, and the Lojban translation is a brivla, that brivla should say about the same about its $x_1$ place as the verb says about its subject. When it comes to the other arguments, however, you must look at the definition of the Lojban word.

!!Caveats
While the editors of this dictionary have in general checked on each other's work, it has not been put under strict editorial review per se. In particular, the editing system does not  offer the possibility of voting for the exclusion of specific words.

!Experimental gismu
This dictionary contains what is commonly referred to as "experimental gismu". These are words of the form CVCCV or CCVCV that have been coined by the users of the language. The LLG has reserved the unassigned word forms with these forms, and specifically discourages the usage and attempts to assign a meaning to them. Nevertheless, one of the aims of this dictionary project is to ''document usage'', and then we need to include everything that has actually been used, compliant or not.

In particular, the reader should be aware that at the time of this writing, the exported print dictionary does __NOT__ set off unofficial gismu in any way. We refer people to the web or dict interfaces to determine whether a particular gismu is official or not.