# mail/lojban-list thread cd49ddcb54e0-valfendi_algorithm | root 200301222303.45852.phma@webjockey.net | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2003-01-23T04:03:45Z | Pierre Abbat <phma@webjockey.net> | 200301222303.45852.phma@webjockey.net | mail/lojban-list/cur/1043294625.cd49ddcb54e044e2.jbomohi:2,S
This is hopefully complete and correct, except for handling ZOI and FAhO, but
has not been tested or proven. I have some partially written proofs but have
to finish writing them.

phma
---
Morphology Algorithm
Revision 5.0pre1, 22 January 2003

The following will become the official baseline algorithm for resolution of
Lojban text into individual words from sounds, stress, and pause.  As such,
it is the ultimate standard of Lojban's unambiguous resolvability, which
may make Lojban speech recognition by computers more possible than for
other languages.  While the algorithm looks very complicated, almost all of
it is resolving special cases, and performing what error detection and
correction may be possible.


We have a string representing the speech stream, marked with stress and
pauses.  We want to break it up into words.

1.  Scan the line from left to right. Convert all spaces to pauses
    unless preceded by comma; convert space to comma if preceded by comma.
2.  Break at all pauses (cannot pause in the middle of a word).
3.  Pick the first piece that has not been resolved.
  A.  If the piece ends in a consonant:
    I.  Make a decapitalized copy of the string with commas removed.
    II. Search backward in the string for a place in the string that is
        preceded by "la", "lai", "la'i", or "doi" where the 'l' or 'd' is not
	immediately preceded by a consonant. (ala'um option off)
    II. Search backward in the string for a place in the string that is
        preceded by "la", "lai", "la'i", or "doi" where the 'l' or 'd' is not
        immediately preceded by a consonant and such that the character at
        that place is a consonant. (ala'um option on)
    III.If you found such a place:
      a.  Split before the place and call the second part a cmene.
      b.  If the second part does not begin with a consonant, resolve it as an
          error. (not necessary if ala'um option is on)
      c.  Search backward in the first part for a consonant. If it is not
          the first character, split before it and resolve the second part as
          a cmavo.
    IV. If you did not find such a place, resolve the piece as a cmene.
  B.  If the piece ends in 'y':
    I.  Search backward for a consonant.
    II. If you find one:
      a.  If it is preceded by a consonant, resolve the piece as an error.
      b.  If it is not preceded by a consonant, break before the consonant
          and resolve the second piece as a cmavo.
    III.If you do not find one, resolve the piece as a cmavo.
  C.  If the piece does not end in 'y' or a consonant and has no consonant
      that is adjacent to a consonant when 'y' is removed:
    I.  Number the consonants starting with 1 and find the last one whose
        number is a power of 2.
    II. If this consonant is the first letter in the piece or there are no
        consonants, resolve the string as a cmavo.
    III.If this consonant is not the first letter, split before it.
  D.  If the piece contains 'y' and no consonant following the last 'y' is
      followed two letters later, not counting apostrophes and commas, by a
      vowel, split it after 'y'. (e.g. ly.Ebucy.Obukybu.DENpabu)
  E.  If the piece contains a consonant followed two letters later, not
      counting apostrophes and commas, by a vowel, and there is no 'y' after
      the letter between the consonant and the vowel, then there is a (possibly
      invalid) brivla in the piece.
    I.  Make a copy of the string, decapitalize all consonants, remove all
        commas adjacent to consonants, and insert commas before consonant
        clusters, between adjacent nondiphthong vowels, and after each pair
        of vowels without a comma between them.
    II. If the stress option is set and no vowel in the piece is stressed,
        stress the vowel in the next-to-last syllable not counting syllables
        which have 'y' in them.
    III.Capitalize all letters in all syllables which have at least one capital
        letter in them.
    IV. Scan forward for a stressed vowel after or at the first CC or CyC
        consonant cluster, then scan forward to the end of the next syllable,
        ignoring syllables with 'y' in them. If the next syllable is itself
        stressed, reset the count.
    V.  If you reached the end of the word looking for a stressed vowel or the
        next syllable, resolve the piece as an error. If the next syllable
        begins with a non-initial consonant cluster, a vowel, or an apostrophe,
        go back to IV and keep looking. If the next syllable begins with a
        valid consonant cluster or single consonant, break before it and
        consider the first part, which is a brivlavau. If there is no next
        syllable, the whole piece is a brivlavau.
    VI. Find the first CC or CyC consonant cluster and check whether it is
        a valid initial cluster (if it contains 'y' it is not) and whether the
        part beginning there is a slinku'i (see below).
      a.  If the brivlavau begins with a consonant cluster, it is a valid
          initial cluster, and the brivlavau is not a slinku'i, resolve it as
          a brivla.
      b.  If the brivlavau begins with a consonant cluster but the cluster is
          not a valid initial cluster or the brivlavau is a slinku'i, resolve
          it as an error.
      c.  If the brivlavau does not begin with a consonant cluster, the cluster
          is a valid initial cluster, and the part beginning there is not a
          slinku'i, break before the consonant cluster and resolve the second
          part as a brivla.
      d.  If the brivlavau does not begin with a consonant cluster and the
          cluster is not a valid initial cluster or the part beginning there
          is a slinku'i, resolve the brivlavau as a brivla.
4.  If there are any more pieces unresolved, return to step 3.

A slinku'i, as far as word breaking is concerned, is anything that matches
the following regex:
^C[raf3]*([gim]?$|[raf4]?y)
where
C matches any consonant
[raf3] matches any 3-letter rafsi
[raf4] matches any 4-letter rafsi
[gim] matches any gismu.
Anything after the first 'y' is ignored. It has no effect on where to break the
word, only on whether the word is valid.

To unsubscribe, send mail to lojban-unsubscribe@onelist.com 

Your use of Yahoo! Groups is subject to http://docs.yahoo.com/info/terms/ 




