# mail/lojban-list thread 2d154cb1b557-lojban_imperfections%3F | root d0bf440903fd8af072c73c3dce0e8859c0c65296@jbomohi.invalid | 2 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1996-12-12T14:57:49Z | Logical Language Group <lojbab@ACCESS.DIGEX.NET> | 2cb8ff58af330456706ad268332e104a7eb25362@jbomohi.invalid | mail/lojban-list/cur/850402669.f62169a27e461291.jbomohi:2,S
John Clifford (aka "pc") and several others have posted answers to the
7 tricky questions.  I haven't had time to read all of the comments
carefully, but I probably agree with pc (as I usually do) on most of them.

I will note in addition that

on 1) another key point for SVO is that it allows description structure
in description sumti to parallel the normal bridi structure.  That is
"le [description]" is defined as being the intended x1 that would fill the
place in the bridi "x1 [description]"  Any order other than SVO makes this
parallel less obvious.

SOV order is euqaly unmarked.  VSO requires "fa" after the selbri before
x1, but for some particular predications (cumki, lakne, etc.) seems to be
expressed that way.  Those who first did so claimed trhat this was NOT
done merely out of English bias, even though there is a common colloquial
English form that parallels these particular examples.



on the Sapir-Whorf test - there are no detailed plans, but there has been
occasional chit0chat of varying levels of seriousness regarding how to
go about this.  pc was involved in a couple of these, and we even tried to do
 some data gathering using a standard logic test, but did not have a stable
 group
of subjects.

We will probably not assume that we have the stability to try something like
this that is long term, untill we have managed to test the much simpler and
more straightforward experiment designed into LogFlash, which requires that
we get a few people to actually use the program seriously for a few months and
send us the dat that is generated.  This has yet to happen %^)

>4. Lojban claims to be culturally neutral and unbiased because of its
>artificial-ness.  However, as I understand it, its vocabulary was
>developed to have maximum resemblance to words from some the world's most
>popular languages.  How can this be artificial or culturally neutral?


I think pc said this, but the words are not all that recognizable to ANY
of the 6 major languages.  They are supposed to be algorithmically
learnable by mnemonic methods to people from those langauges, so as to
minimize learning difficulty while preserving cultural neutrality.
The above-mentioned LogFlash experiment will give data as to whether the
presumed mnemonicity is indeed helpful to learners.

A side benefit of the algorithm is that Lojban gismu have a certain common
sound-flavor that purely random words would not have.  Sound combinations
are more likely to be ones that are actually found in the source language and
thus presumably more pleasant to the ear.

>5. Lojban seems to emphasise morphological and syntactic ambiguity, and
>the language seems to try hard to be the less ambiguous possible.
>However, Lojban allows the compounding of roots to form compound
>words that by themselves could mean any number of things.  Is this
>--More--
>intentional?  Why is this allowed in a supposedly unambiguous language?


tanru are indeed semantically ambiguous in the way that you describe.

lujvo, once created, are intended to have a single fixed meaning just as
rigid as the gismu root meaning are.  However, the method of determining this
meaning is somewhat less than algoriothmic as pc and others have said.
But in the long term, lujvo will appear in the dictionary alongside gismu
and will be equally fixed.  meanwhile, you can use the guidelines in the
reference grammar, or other guidelines that make sense to you, in order to make
"nonce lujvo" and have a reasonable chance that they will be understood.
Discrepencies in such lujvo are likely to be in the higher numbered places
that are seldom filled in, and of course context will often give you clues as to
 what the intended semantic role is of the various places.

People manage to learn English naturally even though every single "place" of
every word is rather arbitrary, and in some cases is opposite to what one
might expect.  (e.g. the verb "obscure" means to make something obscure, and
the subject of the verb is seldom itself obscure - rather it is the object.
Other English verbs do not all work this way.)

This argument also answers 6:
>6.  To learn Lojban, I would have to master the order, number, and
>semantics of arguments associated with each predicate.

No one as yet has mastered more than a couple such place structures and yet
Lojban conversation has taken place, and  indeed some non-native English
speakers have used the language quite easily.  The semantics of the arguments,
because of the nature of Lojban's grammar, os seldom that much like English
except at the superficial gloss level.

Again the learnability of English answers question 7:
>7. Is Lojban intended to be a language learnt and usable by humans?  If
>so, how can it have such strict velency rules that depend only on physical
>order for identifying the role of each argument.

Since English has only physical order for identifying the role of the first
2 and sometimes 3 "arguments", and yet people manage to learn vocabularies
of thousands of words in a very few years.

>Is there anybody in the world fluent in Lojban, speaking fast and
>naturally, just as an Anglophone speaks English?


There is one such person, Nick Nicholas of Australia, who has seemed fluent to
his listeners, but since no one is a fluent listener (i.e. can follow him in
detail at that speed), he has to slow down a lot.  He also might make a few
 errors, but few detect them, and his written Lojban is of high quality.

I am the second most fluent speaker, but I do not speak fast, though I seldom
need to resort to a dictionary.  I have not memorized place structures either.

lojbab



=== 2 | 1996-12-12T14:57:49Z | "John E. Clifford" <Pycyn@AOL.COM> | 7d090b8f9377e36e0c5301ca9bf555083cc334b6@jbomohi.invalid | mail/lojban-list/cur/850402669.4ac962deac84ed36.jbomohi:2,S
coi kris
To take your last question first, I don't think there is anyone who is
native-
fluent in Lojban.  There are several people -- you will hear from some of
them as soon as you put your first bit of Lojban on this list -- who are
pretty good, though.  There have been some moderately lengthy and not
very halting, conversations at meetings and over the telephone as well as
computer chats (which may or may not count).  Transcripts of some of
these are around somewhere.  They do suggest that speakers rarely use all
the places of  predicates with more than four or five places and even then -
- in fact after about three -- are liable to throw in a "preposition" just to
be
on the safe side.  Pushing the limits of  the 5+/- 2 and right branching
rules
is one possible part of a Sapir-Whorf test (or an IQ-enhancer for that
matter).  But, yes, Lojban is meant to be human-speakable and actually is
on occasion (exactly what is required for a proof that it is is not clear).

6.  Order is tricky.  Two factors, at least, have been involved.  One is a
(necessarily informal) survey of the relevant orders in typical sentences in
major languages (and minor when they were interesting and available).
This showed that, for example, agents preceded patients and recipients
pretty regularly and the reverse order was pretty rare, so SO got fixed.
There are also pretty general cross-language order patterns for various
kinds of additional terms, though they are not as clear cut.  The second
factor was an (possibly subjective -- though I think therehave been some
tests) judgement about the centrality of various arguments in the
predication, which ones need to be specified most often.  This, of course,
starts with the question of what places to specify and then goes on to their
order -- less central are later (since they can more often be dropped
without loss of intended information).  English is a fairly typical language
in both these respects, but not the only one consulted.  And notice that all
orders are legal in Lojban and require only minor tricks to produce.

5.  Actually, all the roots (gismu -- we use this as a technical term, so as
not to carry over any freight from other fields that may not fit) are
unambiguous *in Lojban*, but get translated various ways in various
contexts in English or whatever (the first native speaker will probably the
first person who really senses this fact).  Lujvo are, however, open to
wider interpretation (as indeed are tanru), only their syntax, not their
semantics (nor pragmatic neither), is fixed by their structures.  So, again,
it is a human language, since ambiguity is one of the essential of human
language -- art, if nothing else(and law, of course). But there is no
*syntactic* ambiguity, so that parsing by machine is possible, even if
translation/interpretation is not.

4.  Well, those most popular langauges represent a rather wide array of
cultures, about as wide as you can get in the growing homogenized world.
Also, no gism are taken from any of these langauges, they are merely
meant to be accessible to them (contrast Esperanto, for example, or some
of the even worse Interglossae).  More importantly, however, the physical
shape of the words is relatively unimportant from a cultural point of view,
what is important is how each fits into the rest of the vocabulary and into
the sentence structure.  And then no Lojban gismu is like any word in any
other language (try a fairly literal -- by cognates or by dictionary --
translation from English into Lojban; the Lojban  never means much
nearer than shouting distance of the English, as we all learn about week
three).  Here as (did I mention it back then?) in matters of word order and
the like, Lojban tends to be neutral by including as many variations as
possible, without significantly favoring any.

3.  No, the S-W test has never been done, not even finally designed, so far
as I know.  The design must wait for the finished language to calculate
where the most likely effects are to be found and then the test devised to
hit those points especially.  All plans I have ever seen also require a cadre
of  several dozen fluent Lojban speakers and a big grant.  Neither of these
is in the offing.

2.  Logicians have been involved in the design of Lojban (and other
Loglans) since the start.  We (I am one, on the project since '76) do know
the standard terms and also the theoretical freight they carry.  So we use
new terms, which we can load up the way we want to.  There are not that
many differences in some cases, but rather enormous ones in others (no
logical or linguistic expression in the NP class catches what all is involved
in a sumti, for example).  Ditto linguists (me again, for one).

1.  A mess of factors for SVO (but notice that VSO and SOV are usually
equally as good and without any extra flags-- the three most common
forms, over 90% of base forms worldwide, it is said).  1) It is the most
common order worldwide (not theoretically significant, just handy for
learning -- like the gismu forms).  2) In logic, while it is not the usual
form, it is a common form for making non-standard points (negative
empty universe claims, for example) and it is nice to have that ability in
Lojban, since it saves a bit in the syntax (but is not much used anymore).
3) Again in syntax, SVO save a bit on various non-declarative forms like
imperatives and observatives, though not so much in the current language
as in earlier versions.  Finally, word order is not thought to be culturally
significant in the Sapir-Whorf sense.

>|83


