# mail/lojban-list thread aca598061a96-progress_report | root 199607261827.oaa26938@access1.digex.net | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1996-07-26T18:27:37Z | Logical Language Group <lojbab@access.digex.net> | 199607261827.oaa26938@access1.digex.net | mail/lojban-list/cur/838405657.aca598061a96cdba.jbomohi:2,S
also to remind you that you are accumulating mail in my account
-currently 1.3Meg of compressed and another 600K of uncompressed
mail.

I am finishing chap 6. today, which may not sound like I have gotten far,
but this week has seen me greatly speed up, now that I am reading stuff
that is about sentences rather than sounds or words.  I seem to be averaging
around 4-5 hrs to finish one chapter if the time is undivided, so there is
still a rasonable chance that I will be done before LogFest.

My comments are extensive, and I would say most thing are substantive rather
than style.  Yet I have found only a couple of things that are "technical
issues" that we may disagree on.   There are a fair number of glitches still
that people have missed in previous passes, so I think I do need to
finish the review before we go to press (whcih of course means that I need
to FINISH it, I know %^).  

At this point I am uncertain whether to ship you off the comments that I have,
presuming that you will be doing something substantive with them before 
LogFest (and presuming that you will be able to readd and understand them - 
the markup is a bit chaotic and cluttered, even if you discount that I am
not all that neat a writer when I am scribbling in bed and other places where 
I have been able to grab some time for reading.)  The alternative seems to
me that I save stuff up till you get here, and we go through things then
together, and then try to get a final draft done if/when we come up at Labor
Day (which offfers the advantage that Chassell can also meet with us then,
and we will know whether LogFest-based decisions will have any impact.
The negative of shipping things off to you is that I refer back to my
own npotes and comments a fair amount (not to mention prior chapters of text),
and hence would have to at minimum get a  good copy before sending them,
and I might add some comments on early chapters after later reading (I added
one comment on Chap 5 after reading Chap 6).  Since by the time I read your
response (or hear from you - I'll be at a cub scout camp on St/Sun), and get 
things mailed up there (please confirm the address you want me to send to
if you want me to do so), you'll have only a week or so to do something with
them, I am not sure it buys us much.

How is Gail doing, footwise?  If she is still considering coming, I will
mention that the Smithsonian is hgaving their 150th birthday party on the
Mall LogFest weekend, and will have special tents setup with exhoibits.
But of course that may be the worst thing for Gail, since one cannot do the
Mall without a LOT of walking.

Regarding labor Day: If we are still invited, we are considering
leaving the week before, stopping for a few days with family in Philly, 
and maybe also for a couple days in NYC, staying in some cheap suburban
motel, and coming into the city by train (I know driving into NYC is for 
fools only).  I need to find out something about the trains in from NJ
(or I guess I could call T. Peter Park about staying out on Long Island,
but I presume accomodations there would be more expensive.  When I have
done this previously, I stayed out in Parsippany and/or Dover, and drove
in close, like to Newark, and caught a train just across the river.
Any and all ideas are welcome - figure we would get there Wed or Thurs, and
then drive up to your country place around the same time you do so on 
Friday.  Then on Monday, I will have to marathon drive home to get the
kids home in time for school - probably let them sleep in the car and not try
to get home before dawn, thus allowing for a nap and/or stretch enroute.

As a result, we would have nearly the whole weekend, leaving perhaps midday 
Monday (NOra would take Tuesday off since shge seldom sleeps in the car when
I
am driving).  I can;t think of any other way to make things work.  Nora has
already taken the vacation time the week before, whether we come or not.

Oh, Avgust's boirthday is the 31st.

Well, let me get dine and back to Chapter 6.

lojbab


