# mail/lojban-list thread c8c6e802503f-%3D%3D%3D%3E%3E_free_1_yr_usa_magazine_sub_sent | root 848644297.922800.0@cunyvm.cuny.edu | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1996-11-22T05:54:20Z | Tempting Tear-Outs <tt@AKULA.COM> | 848644297.922800.0@cunyvm.cuny.edu | mail/lojban-list/cur/848642060.c8c6e802503f1bbf.jbomohi:2,S

FOR MORE INFO:   please "cut out" the below form on the "cut" lines shown,
and fax it, for the fasted reply to:                  718-227-9125   (this
is a fax # in the USA)

or send via smail (first class mail or airmail) to:
                                         Tempting Tear-Outs
                                         Att. Free-catalogue-by-email Dept
                                         3835 Richmond Ave.  Suite #200
                                         Staten Island NY  10312-3828
                                         USA

--> IMPORTANT complete directions, to ensure that you get a reply, and more
info follow, below the reply form and the catalogue options.


*------------cut here/begin-------------------------------------------*

Name:
Internet email address:
Smail home address:
City-State-Zip:
Country:
Work Tel. #:
Work Fax #:
Home Tel. #:
Home Fax #:

How did you hear about us (name of person/company who referred you or the
area of
the internet that you saw us mentioned in):  Referral by: Tempting
Tear-Outs
100196-l

Name of USA mags you currently get on the newsstand or in the store:

Name of USA mags you currently get on a subscription basis, through the mail:

Name of USA mags you would like price quotes on when we call you:

Catalogue format desired (list number of choice below):

*------------cut here/end--------------------------------------------*



CATALOGUE FORMAT CHOICES:

1.  19-Part email- can be read by EVERYONE (~353K Total).
2.  For more advanced computer users:  attached text file ~334K - you
     must know how to download an attached text file and then be able to
     open it with your word processor.  If in doubt, don't ask for this
     version.  This isn't for internet *newbies.* Better to order option 1
     and spend a few minutes pasting them into one whole text document
     with your word processor, than to waste hours trying to figure how
     to deal with this option.
3.  For more advanced Macintosh computer users: compressed attached
     text file, created with a Stuffit(tm) self-extracting archive (.sea),
      ~187K.  Can be decompressed by any Macintosh computer user; no
     special expansion software or knowledge of Stuffit (tm) needed.  You
     just double-click on the file icon and it automatically expands
     (unstuffs). This is for more advanced mac computer users only, as
     you still have to know how to deal with an attached file.  It will cut
     your download time by 75%.   Expands out to the same ~525K file in
     option #2.  See option #2 for more info on what you will need to be
     able to do.
4.  For expert computer users: compressed attached text file, created with
     Stuffit(tm),  ~161K.  Can be decompressed by any computer user who
     has expansion software to decompress (expand) Stuffit(tm) (.sit) files.
     This is for more advanced computer users only and will cut your
     download time by 78%.   Expands out to the same ~525K file in option
     #2.  See option #2 for more info on what you will need to be able to do.




VERY IMPORTANT DIRECTIONS TO ENSURE THAT YOU GET A REPLY:

1.   you must call from an "unblocked number," ie. one that is not blocked
from caller id.  If you have a blocked number, you must first unblock it.
In most cases this means dialing *82 from a touch-tone phone (or 1182 from
a rotary phone) before you dial 1-718-227-9125.
2.   no reply forms can be accepted by email....only via fax or smail.
3.   faxes with cover pages will be rejected.  You must send *only* the
reply form.
4.   forms not *completely* filled in will not be acknowledged.
5.   you will receive a reply within 1 business day directly from the
company making the offer via email.  Therefore you must have an email
address.  If you read this message, then you must have an email address, or
access to one, at least.   :-)
6.   your fax must not exceed 1 page in length.   Faxes of 2 or more pages
will be sensed, then auto-terminated and deleted.  Your fax goes directly
onto our 5.0 gigabyte hard drive and we must limit all incoming faxes to 1
page.
7.   all faxes must begin with:
*------------cut here/begin-------------------------------------------*
and must end with:
*------------cut here/end--------------------------------------------*
8. Any fax not conforming to this format will be sensed by our software,
then auto-terminated and deleted from the hard drive, before any human ever
gets to see it.


WHO WE ARE:

Tempting Tear-Outs is an advertising company that brings potential new
customers to the companies they advertise for.

MORE ABOUT THE COMPANY MAKING THE FREE OFFER:

The company making the offer is a magazine subscription agency based in the
USA.  They have over 1,500 popular USA titles available to be shipped to
*any* country, including of course, to anywhere in the USA!    They offer a
FREE 1 yr. subscription to your choice of over 270 of the titles in their
catalogue to any new customer using them for the first time.       The
dollar value of the freebies, based on the subscription prices directly
from the publishers, ranges from $6.97 all the way up to $50.00!

For new customers in the USA, there is no charge for FPH (foreign postage &
handling), so the freebie is 100% free!   For new customers living
overseas, the only charge on the freebie would be for the FPH (foreign
postage & handling).

Their president has been in the magazine subscription business since 1973
and they are very customer-service oriented.   They will even help you with
address changes on your magazines, even if you move from one country to
another country.   They have thousands of happy customers in over 59
countries.

Their price guarantee is very simple:       they guarantee that their
subscription prices are the lowest available and they will BEAT any
legitimate, verifiable offer before you pay them or match it afterwards, by
refunding you the difference in price PLUS the cost of the postage stamp
you would use sending in the special offer to them, even 6 months after you
pay them, as long as it was current at the time of your offer.    Does that
sound fair?       Wouldn't it be great if everything you bought came with
that price guarantee?

Sometimes they are less than half of the next best deal out there,
sometimes just a little cheaper, but always you get the lowest rates
without having to shop around.     With 1,500 titles on their list, they
would like to think that they have also the best selection around!

Within the USA, for their USA customers, they are cheaper than all their
competitors and even the publishers themselves.  This is their price
guarantee.         The 1 yr. freebie that you get with your first order is
completely free!

Overseas, (even after you factor in the cost of the FPH (foreign postage &
handling) and the conversion from USA Dollars to your currency), on the
average, they are generally around one-fourth to one-half of what the
newsstands overseas charge locally for USA magazines.  On some titles they
are as little as one-tenth of what the newsstands charge.  They are also
the cheapest subscription source for delivery overseas, including directly
from the publishers themselves!   Some publishers don't even offer
subscriptions overseas.........but overseas subscriptions are this
company's specialty!  They feel that magazines should not be a luxury
overseas.   In the USA, people buy magazines and then toss them after
reading them for just a few minutes or hours.  They are so cheap in the
USA!   Well, this company would like to make it the same way for their
overseas members.  They are also cheaper than all their competitors in the
USA and overseas, including the publishers themselves!   It is also *highly
unlikely* you will find any of their USA competitors calling you overseas,
in order to offer that personal touch, just to sell you a couple of
magazines!  But that is what this company specializes in and loves doing!
Around one-half their business comes from overseas, so they are very
patient with new members who only speak limited English as a 2nd language.
Subscription prices quoted for overseas consist of the subscription
price, plus the FPH.   You add the two together and that is your total
cost.   The exception is the 1 yr. freebie you get with your first order.
On that title, you pay *only* the FPH for the 1 yr. term.

Their prices are so cheap because when you deal with them, you cut-out all
the middlemen.


HERE IS HOW YOU CAN GET MORE INFO AND GET STARTED WITH THEM:

Simply fax or smail back to us the reply form listed at the top of this
message.   We will then forward your form on to the subscription agency.
They will then email their "big and juicy" catalogue to you, in whichever
of the four formats you chose.   The catalogue is FREE and makes for hours
of fascinating reading, on its own. It includes the complete list of
freebies, a complete list of all the titles they sell, as well as detailed
descriptions on most of the titles, along with lists of titles by category
of interest.

They will then give you a friendly, no-pressure, no obligation, 5-minute
call to go over how they work and to answer any questions that you might
have, as well as give you up-to-the minute price quotes on any titles you
might be considering.     They will call you in whatever country you live
in, taking the time difference into account.        As they like to
emphasize the personal touch they give to each new customer, all first-time
orders can only be done via phone, so they can answer all your questions
completely and personally.   Once you have placed your first order via
phone, you will be able to place future orders and make inquiries on your
account, get price quotes, etc., all via email, if that is most convenient
for you.

Within the USA, they accept payment via check over the phone, Mastercard,
Visa and American Express.      Overseas, they accept Mastercard, Visa and
American Express, even if your credit card is a local one in local
currency!

That's our introduction of our client that we represent.   We hope that we
have piqued your interest and that you will take the next step to get their
free catalogue!   Thank you for your time and interest.

--
Tempting Tear-Outs.
For more info on advertising rates, please write us on your company
letterhead, w/business card, via smail to:   Tempting Tear-Outs, 3835
Richmond Ave. Suite #200, Staten Island NY  10312-3828, USA.



