# mail/bpfk-announce thread 5f63107119e7-crimson | root 46787621.1000501@axion.ca | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2007-06-20T00:32:09Z | "Hal F. Shannon" <ysqu@axion.ca> | 46787621.1000501@axion.ca | mail/bpfk-announce/cur/1182299529.5f63107119e74126.jbomohi:2,S
OTCPicks.com Picks SREA As The Stock to Watch. UP 272% In 7 Days!

Score One Inc.
SREA
$0.30 UP 20% Today

Up another 20% today and over 272% in the last 7 days, OTCPICKS.com puts
SREA on their watch list. Read up and get on SREA first thing Wed!

full band demos; Mixing; Pitching the finished demos. We do not have any
room in our budget so if you are an undiscovered musician or on a label
and are looking to get your music out, our comedy is the perfect place
for it. There is no cost to register. As well as several weekday matinee
performances. Actress also plays Mrs.

This is a high-energy position which requires excellent stage presence,
and someone who can sing lots of styles well. Not only must Rashad
decide whether she will dishonor her father and go to art school, but
she must also find herself amongst the family chaos going on in her
life. com Auditions will be and of June. members are given featured
slots. All three of these roles are refractions of the same life-force
woman.
Growing up, the Queens rapper originally wanted to be a heavyweight
boxer, but eventually fell back on rapping. YOU MUST BE ABLE TO
GUARANTEE A MIN.

Now a sous-chef in a hot restaurant, and a totally regular guy. Grandma
Free carries a flask in her bag full of whiskey. Ana is the girl of his
dreams.
members are given featured slots. Slated speakers will explain what you
need to know about shooting, editing, encoding, distributing and
promoting Internet videos.
Confident woman required.

A stunning bombshell who lives what she considers to be a 'free' life.

Will be given the most screen time.

Her dream is to be on Def Poetry Jam.

The job is currently on a deferred payment basis. Possibly Willy's only
friend.

Willy's weallthy, successful older brother. Source: Film In The City
WHAT'S YOUR ADVICE TO SOMEONE BREAKING INTO THE INDUSTRY?

If interested, please send your C. Now their kids are grown; she wants
to move back into the city to regain her youth.

Issuers of this news and information and not Actorschecklist.
MOBfest is a three day music business seminar focused on building a
buzz, aiding in awareness and peaking the interest of the music business
community. The Conclave Learning Conference draws radio and music
industry professionals, students, teachers, promotion companies,
suppliers, syndicators and free agents. Actors should be prepared to
read from the script.
He is JAMAICAN and speaks patwa.

We already have five songs specially written for the film by three
songwriters, as well as a ten-minute demo reel we have already shot, and
an outline screenplay.

members are given featured slots.

members are given featured slots. She likes to write slam poetry and
your standard English class poetry. ," CANADA We are editing our short
film and require either your origional music or you to volunteer to
colaborate on a score. She was born and raised in JAMAICA.
Dancer audition: Male, need for male ensemble dancers who can sing on
key. The film will explore the darker side of adults and the end of
childhood. She is a very bright girl.

All dancers MUST have a strong legit singing voice.

