# mail/bpfk-announce thread 62a54bd2db3d-livid | root 46877776.6080608@fr.ibm.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2007-07-02T14:45:02Z | "Hutchinson L. Dinah" <pxwfd@fr.ibm.com> | 46877776.6080608@fr.ibm.com | mail/bpfk-announce/cur/1183387502.62a54bd2db3da3da.jbomohi:2,S
ERMX Grabs Edge Of US Trade With China And Moves Into Nitride Devices!

EntreMetrix Inc. (ERMX)
$0.16

Congress's push to increase trade agreements with China gives ERMX huge
advantage as they enter joint venture to manufacture Nitride Devices for
military, energy and technological solutions in China. This is huge. Get
on ERMX Monday!

Also of concern is the effect dioxins can have on unborn children and
infants, as they can be passed through the placenta or carried in breast
milk.

It also increases the risk of overdosing. abscesses and intestinal
bleeding linked to rupture of the bowel.

Waste incinerators and chemical and fertiliser manufacturing plants
mainly.

However, life expectancy has improved signficantly in recent years.

People with problems such as epilepsy, high blood pressure and
depression are thought to be more likely to suffer side effects from
ecstasy use. It is comparatively rare, affecting around one or two
people in every thousand, mainly older people. Users do not become
physically dependent on LSD, but some may experience a psychological
dependence. CF affects mainly children and young people.

Research on long-time users suggests it may cause brain damage and
mental illness as well as liver and kidney problems in later life.
Once a 'trip' has begun, it is impossible to stop or control it.
Pregnant women who regularly use amphetamines may suffer premature birth
and the drug can be passed onto babies through breast milk. Quite often
there are no symptoms at all.

Some develop a tolerance of the drug and need to take higher and higher
doses, but deaths and overdose are rare. Just about everywhere - they
are present in the atmosphere, soil, rivers and the food chain. They
need to boost their insulin levels, either by regular injections or by
wearing a pump which dispenses the hormone under the skin.
Those who have suffered from depression include Sir Winston Churchill
and Florence Nightingale. It is a neurological disorder but does not
lead to problems with other functions of the brain such as intellect.
However, immediate side effects can include nausea, a dry mouth, raised
blood pressure and depression. Where they do exist there may be pain or
tenderness in the leg and raised skin temperature around the area.
Blood sugar levels must be kept as close to normal as possible through
insulin injections, regular exercise and control of diet.

Other environmental factors and illnesses seem to trigger the disease.
This can eventually lead to addiction. The fact that heroin is often
adulterated with other substances can also cause overdose.

Women are twice as likely to suffer from depression, but three times as
many men commit suicide.

Dystonia is the term used to describe a condition that causes
involuntary sustained muscle contractions that lead to abnormal
movements and postures. Users report that it causes a sense of euphoria,
followed by a feeling of calm.
Many users believe they perform better on cocaine, but research shows
that this is probably just their perception rather than reality. Many
users believe they perform better on cocaine, but research shows that
this is probably just their perception rather than reality.
Stress is thought to exacerbate the illness which can affect any part of
the digestive system, from the mouth to the anus.
Common side effects after coming down from the drug include depression
and tiredness.
Symptoms of an overdose include rapid heartbeat, heart failure,
shortness of breath, unconsciousness and coma. Ecstasy affects body
temperature.

