# mail/lojban-list thread ae10a2b07148-difficult_logical_questions | root 676db32f-fdd7-479f-825e-4571293b08a1o@googlegroups.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2020-08-11T14:26:54Z | mostawesomedude@gmail.com | 676db32f-fdd7-479f-825e-4571293b08a1o@googlegroups.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/1597156014.ae10a2b07148a02c.jbomohi:2,S
coi

I apologize somewhat in advance. The following questions have driven folks 
mad (mostly on IRC, but also sometimes IRL), so don't worry if you're not 
interested in them. However, they all seem extremely pertinent to continued 
formalization efforts, and I'd like to think that they've come up before. I 
also have rigged the game somewhat by having an answer for each question, 
which I'll provide; however, I'm very interested in what answers other 
folks have, and I am only committed to my answers inasmuch as I have 
researched them in order to have a well-read opinion.

Relations are, generally, sets. In particular they are subsets of products. 
Even more particularly, nullary relations are truth values and unary 
relations are sets. However, ckaji2 ranges over all unary relations and 
ckini3 ranges over all binary relations; kampu2, cmima2, and steci3 range 
over (almost) all sets. This leads to immediate size issues; how do we 
avoid Russell's paradox?

My answer is to declare an inaccessible cardinal, which is like a 
cornerstone that can be used to build a "small" set theory. This cardinal 
can be big enough to give us enough room for not just ZF set theory, but 
any small category or similar structure. The downside is that we are 
immediately cut off from some large objects; however, we weren't using them 
anyway. However, we are given a very flexible universe of things; we are 
free to accept the Axiom of Choice, or not; we can also choose whether to 
accept the Law of Excluded Middle.

CLL Lojban allows quantification ranging over two orders of variables; {da} 
range over things, while {bu'a} range over relations between things. This 
is syntax for second-order logic (SOL). However, many speakers, including 
myself, infer an informal type system which constrains each {da} to range 
only over some set of things which isn't the set of all things in the 
universe. (To clarify this sentence, solve our size issues.) When all 
things are constrained in this way, then it happens that second-order logic 
becomes many-sorted first-order logic; every "set of things" becomes its 
own type in a sort of types of sets. Is Lojban second-order, or many-sorted 
first-order?

My answer is to embrace full SOL. The main tradeoff to consider is that 
full second-order semantics often give categoricity, which means that 
things can be specified up to isomorphism, but are Gödel-incomplete; while 
first-order semantics can be Gödel-complete, but usually admits 
non-standard models of any infinite thing. For example, the natural numbers 
are categorical, which means that there is a second-order theory (known as 
Z₂) which uniquely identifies them. In modern category-theoretic language, 
we say that a natural numbers object, or NNO, is unique when it exists. In 
both cases, the uniqueness is up to the bounding rules of the universe of 
sets. We can, of course, recover fragments of first-order reasoning at any 
time by simply putting extra {poi} onto our {da}, and we can mechanically 
send SOL to FOL with some choice of type-inference algorithm.

Also, like, "the cat is red," is it a cat or a red? SOL lets us just say 
that it's a thing which is both among the set of cats and also among the 
set of reds, while FOL requires us to informally infer types and say that 
it's a cat.

CLL gives full-throated support for the Law of Excluded Middle (LEM), with 
a rule which sends {na na broda} => {broda}. This happens to be equivalent 
to a complete buy-in to the world of Boolean reasoning, and there are 
examples of this embrace throughout Lojban. {nagi'a} is mistaken for 
implication, for example, despite merely having the same truth table in the 
Booleans; {steci} manifests the Axiom of Choice in one direction with 
steci1 empty, or LEM with steci2 empty. To be fair, it's reasonable to 
imagine that, since a unary relation is a set, surely a thing either is or 
is not an element of a unary relation. But, over the past century, we've 
found that LEM is not realizeable/computable. {le du'u nei jitfa} (or 
whatever equivalent one (in)formally desires to work with) doesn't have a 
consistent truth value. So do we keep LEM?

My answer is kind of biased, isn't it? I'm a constructivist of sorts, so 
I'm going to prefer it if LEM is optional. It can always be added in on a 
per-proof basis in order to tighten up some reasoning. But this also 
requires trading in De Morgan's laws and negation-raising through the 
prenex for weaker constructive versions.

Oh, also, the inaccessible-cardinal construction I used earlier gives us a 
topos, but not necessarily a Boolean topos; if we have a set of things, we 
can't form the set of all things in the universe which are't in our 
original set, because we can't see from inside the topos that the 
universe's things might all fit into a set.

To be a bit more clear, we could still have {na na na broda} <=> {na 
broda}. There would still only be two truth values. We simply would be a 
bit more honest about when we can't tell which of the two truth values 
we're supposed to assign.

I hope that this was useful food for thought for the multiple folks working 
on different formalizations, since I think that everybody will need to 
answer these questions one way or another.

And finally, I should include preliminary feedback from IRC. Folks were 
generally supportive of the first two points, but preferred not giving up 
LEM. There were strong and serious concerns about contextuality vs. modal 
possibility and the domain of discourse vs. the universe of things; folks 
don't want Lojban to be artificially limited. In general, I'm finding that 
that one quote from a decade ago is true, about how formalization is a 
political process even when the maths is well-settled.

.i mi'e la korvo .i di'ai

-- 
You received this message because you are subscribed to the Google Groups "lojban" group.
To unsubscribe from this group and stop receiving emails from it, send an email to lojban+unsubscribe@googlegroups.com.
To view this discussion on the web visit https://groups.google.com/d/msgid/lojban/676db32f-fdd7-479f-825e-4571293b08a1o%40googlegroups.com.

