# mail/lojban-list thread 58a38fd099cc-new_bpfk_forming%2E_volunteers_for_membership_a | root 291c68bb-f334-4c2a-92ad-456270b4686b@googlegroups.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2015-03-02T00:48:28Z | mukti <shunpiker@gmail.com> | 291c68bb-f334-4c2a-92ad-456270b4686b@googlegroups.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/1425257308.58a38fd099cc6359.jbomohi:2,S
 

Forwarding this for those not subscribed to lojban-announcements or 
following the Annual Meeting.

Begin forwarded message:

*From: *"Bob LeChevalier, President and Founder - LLG"
*Subject:* [Llg-members] [lojban-announcements] New BPFK forming. 
Volunteers for membership and chair are needed.
*Date: *March 1, 2015 1:23:37 PM EST

Members of the Logical Language Group (LLG) have voted to reauthorize BPFK 
(a.k.a. "banpla fuzykamni", "baupla fuzykamni", "byfy") as a standing 
committee with the charge of improving and maintaining formal descriptions 
of Lojban, elaborating undocumented and under-documented language features, 
resolving inconsistencies and errors in existing documentation, and 
responding to issues that arise in usage.

BPFK, as reauthorized, replaces the committee by that name that was 
commissioned by the Official Baseline Statement of 2002. A rump committee, 
headed by Robin Powell, will have the remaining task of producing CLL 
version 1.1 for publication.

The motion to reauthorize (attached below) calls for an election by the 
members of LLG to determine the initial leadership and membership of the 
committee. The chair is to be elected to a one-year term (or until the next 
Annual Meeting), and the members will have the opportunity to work with the 
chair to determine committee procedures, including membership policies.

Members of the lojban-using community are encouraged to apply for these 
positions, regardless of whether or not they are members of LLG or BPFK, 
past or present. There are no explicit qualifications for BPFK membership 
at this time; any qualifications will be determined by BPFK itself.

If you are interested in being considered as a chair or member of BPFK, and 
are not participating in the ongoing Annual Meeting, please contact LLG at 
lojban@lojban.org.

----

BPFK REAUTHORIZATION

LLG hereby recommissions BPFK (a.k.a. "banpla fuzykamni", "baupla 
fuzykamni", "byfy") as a standing committee with the charge of improving 
and maintaining formal descriptions of Lojban, elaborating undocumented and 
under-documented language features, resolving inconsistencies and errors in 
existing documentation, and responding to issues that arise in usage.

BPFK is expressly empowered to determine its own decision-making process 
and pursue its own agenda within the scope of its charge as specified in 
this charter.

BPFK is authorized to propose standards for the lojban language which may 
include, but are not limited to, lists of words, definitions in various 
languages, human or mechanical specifications of the grammar, and 
instructional or reference texts. BPFK may develop standards documents or 
recognize documents which have been developed by other bodies or 
individuals.

Standard documents may be reported to an Annual Meeting or Special Meeting 
of the membership for ratification by a two-thirds majority of the general 
membership. Once ratified, these may be described as "official standards" 
of LLG. When an Annual Meeting or Special Meeting of the membership is not 
in session, BPFK may seek Board approval of standards, which upon such 
approval, may be described as "interim standards".

Upon adoption of this policy, the Annual Meeting of LLG membership will 
hold an election for the office of chair of BPFK and may appoint or 
re-appoint members to the committee by a simple majority vote. After this 
election, the authority to appoint or elect members to BPFK will be 
delegated to the committee itself. The chair and members appointed by LLG 
will be considered to constitute the entire and exclusive membership of the 
committee until such a time as BPFK exercises the authority to manage its 
own membership.

Henceforth, BPFK may, in its annual report to the membership, nominate a 
candidate to serve a subsequent term as chair. If such a candidate is 
reported, LLG membership will hold a vote of confidence requiring a simple 
majority to confirm the nomination. If no candidate is nominated by BPFK, 
or if the nominated candidate is not confirmed by the membership, an open 
election will be held by LLG membership. At no time will membership in LLG 
or BPFK be considered a requirement for the position of chair of BPFK.

The natural term of the office of chair of BPFK will begin at the time of 
the confirmation or election at the Annual Meeting and extend to the 
confirmation or election of a chair at the subsequent Annual Meeting, or to 
the adjournment of that meeting if no chair is elected or confirmed. Should 
the chair become vacant for any reason while an Annual Meeting or Special 
Meeting of the membership is not in session, the Board may ask the 
committee to nominate an interim chair to serve the balance of the term. 
Should the committee fail to forward a nominee, or should more than one 
nominee be forwarded, the Board reserves the discretion to appoint an 
interim chair.

In the case that the Annual Meeting of LLG membership fails to confirm or 
elect a chair, the committee will be considered suspended until such a time 
as an interim chair is appointed by the Board, or until the election of a 
new chair at a subsequent Annual Meeting or Special Meeting of the 
membership.

Any time that a chair is elected by the membership of LLG without having 
been nominated to that election by BPFK, any membership in BPFK will be 
deemed to lapse, any membership-related procedure established within the 
committee will be deemed to expire, and LLG may elect new members to the 
committee. The authority to appoint or elect members will be returned to 
the committee once it reconvenes. The appointment of an interim chair will 
not be held to cause any membership in BPFK to lapse, or to have any effect 
upon BPFK membership procedures.

In the case that policies specified in this document are found to 
contradict policies previously established by LLG or its Board of 
Directors, the policies in this document should be held to supplant the 
previous policies.

------------

lojbab

Robert LeChevalier, President, LLG

-- 
You received this message because you are subscribed to the Google Groups "lojban" group.
To unsubscribe from this group and stop receiving emails from it, send an email to lojban+unsubscribe@googlegroups.com.
To post to this group, send email to lojban@googlegroups.com.
Visit this group at http://groups.google.com/group/lojban.
For more options, visit https://groups.google.com/d/optout.

