# mail/lojban-list thread 93bf4bdb812c-fu'ivla_fu_xkcd | root cajhgu=9c5wjvhqbmkgf4tw_5amuucs7emho9dtt3qz9yjxabbq@mail.gmail.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2015-02-17T23:36:36Z | Stela Selckiku <selckiku@gmail.com> | cajhgu=9c5wjvhqbmkgf4tw_5amuucs7emho9dtt3qz9yjxabbq@mail.gmail.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/1424216196.93bf4bdb812c22a2.jbomohi:2,S
.i doi jbope'o mi vlaxagji
--Dear Lojbanfriends, I don't know as many words as I need to.

.i mi ji'a djica lo nu rau jbovla cu zasti
--I too want enough words of Lojban to exist.

.i mi mutce nelci lo cnino ke bangu po'o nai cmene ciste
--I quite like our new system for naming languages (and other things).

.i mi ze'u djica lo nu finti za'u simsa
--I've long been wanting to make more similar things.

.i ku'i mi pu na'e te sidbo lo xamgu
--But I didn't have any good ideas.

.i ku'i .o'a bu'o .ia mi pu zi finti lo cnino poi xamgu banzu
--But I'm proud to say that I've just invented something new that I do
believe might be good enough.

.i la'a slabu do fa lo nu la'o .gy. Randall Munroe .gy. noi finti XKCD cu
pu zu xalbo zanckasu tavla fi ma'a
--It's probably familiar to you how Randall Munroe, who invented xkcd, long
ago had some good fun talking about us.

.i za'a bau lo glibau ve cu'u so'i kibro lo XKCD lisxra cu cizra valsi
--I've seen that in English at many places online xkcd strips are a strange
sort of word.

.i lo samnei kulnu prenu cu pilno lo XKCD .urli lo nu sinxa lo pluja ke
samneiklu srana
--Tech culture people use xkcd URLs to symbolize complicated things related
to tech culture.

.i ca'e mi finti lo simsa poi jbovla
--I hereby declare that I have invented some similar words of Lojban.

.i zo xekcedi jicmu
--The word "xekcedi" is the foundation.

.i zo xekcedi zo'u fabu me'e zo'oi xkcd lisxra zo'e RM boi RM fi'o catni
porsi namcu febu
--xekcedi: x1 is an xkcd comic (made by Randall Munroe) with official
sequence number x2

.i ji'a mi finti pavozebi sa'e ba'u cu'i drata poi ninjbovla
--In addition, i'm inventing 1478 (count 'em, 1478!) other new words of
Lojban.

.i je'u mi de'a vlaxagji
--Truly, my hunger for words is abating.

.i ku'i mi nitcu lo nu ro do sidju
--But I'll need all of you to help.

.i milxe frica lo cnino poi bangu valsi
--It's a little different than the new language words.

.i .au ma'a te sidbo lo te .ivla rau cinri
--I want us to think of enough interesting ideas for the place structures.

.i sa'e mi te sidbo lo nu finti lo smuni poi sarxe ro lo lisxra
--More specifically my idea is to invent a meaning harmonious with each
comic.

.i .ai mupli ciksi
--I'll try to explain with some examples.

.i mu'a ca'e zo xekcedipasopa cu srana lo lisxra poi srana lo jbobau
--For instance, I'm declaring the word "xekcedipasopa" to be about the
comic about Lojban.

.i zoi .urli. http://xkcd.com/191/ .urli. urli lo di'u lisxra
-- http://xkcd.com/191/ is the URL of that comic.

.i zo xekcedipasopa zo'u fabu jbopre gi'e gasnu febu poi fanza fibu zi'e
poi ciksi fo lo xekcedi be li pa so pa
--xekcedipasopa: x1 (Lojbanist) does annoying thing x2 to x3, as described
in xkcd 191.

.i mu'a cusku da'i lu .oi .i ko na xekcedipasopa fi mi li'u
--For instance one could say, "Ugh, don't xkcd191 me."

.i .au ma'a finti lo plixautce
--I'd like if we could think up very useful things.

.i mu'a mi troci se pi'o lo xekcedi be li pa re re no
--As an example I'll try with http://xkcd.com/1220/

.i zo xekcediparereno zo'u fabu selsnu .i febu nu casnu la'e di'u .i fibu
nu casnu la'e di'u .i fobu nu casnu la'e di'u .i fibu nu casnu la'e di'u
(to ca lo nu lo cimni ciksi bo bridi cu xanri be ko selsku ku mi djica lo
nu mlana sa'e nai tavla do lo'u  la'edi'u  le'u noi .ia cladu'e .ie nai pei
zi'e noi mi pilno se ba'i ke'a zo lau noi fadni catni pilno sei jai se
stidi lo drata zi'e noi je'u pilno fi so'usai vajni zi'e noi ku'i la'a do
fengu mi lo nu drata pilno kei zi'e noi mi nelci lo da'i nu do finti lo
xagmau poi ka'e basti lo'u  la'eli'u  le'u noi ke'u .ia sai cladu'e .i .uo
ba zi xruti jundi lo cimni bridi toi) .i xy. xi ci'i nu casnu lau si la'e
di'u

--xekcediparereno: x1 is a topic of conversation, x2 is discussion of
discussion of that topic, x3 is discussion of THAT, x4 is discussion of
that, the most recent that that is, x5 is talking about THAT next that
(...while that infinite explanation bridi continues to be spoken in your
imagination, I'd like to side-ly so-to-speak talk to you about "la'edi'u"
which I think is too long don't you agree?, and which I use in place of it
"lau" which by ordinary authorities is suggested to be used for something
else, and which is really used for very few important things and which
however still probably you're mad at be for using for something else and
which I wish you'd invent something better to replace "la'edi'u" which,
again, I really do believe is too long. So, that's that, returning
attention to the infinite bridi...), and xinfinity is discussing lauHHxxm,
sorry, THAT thing I just said.

.i .oi .u'i mi tolmo'i fi lo nu mi platu fi lo nu fanva di'u kei ca lo nu
ciska
--Ugggghhhh :D I forgot that I'd planned to translate that while I was
writing it.

.i ku'i .a'o do za'e jmimli
--But I hope you got at least a little of that.

.i ta'o nai do cinmo ma lo sidbo be fi mi
--So anyway, what do you feel about my idea?

.i .a'o rau do troci rau zdile nu finti rau melbi xekcedivla
--I hope enough of you will try enough times to have fun inventing enough
beautiful xkcdwords.

.i ko ko kurji .i ko citka rau badna
--Take care of yourself. Eat enough bananas.

mi'e la stela selckiku ju'i lobypli mu'o lobdau
I'm Lock Key-Opened, attention Lojbanists, over to the Lojbarguers.

-- 
You received this message because you are subscribed to the Google Groups "lojban" group.
To unsubscribe from this group and stop receiving emails from it, send an email to lojban+unsubscribe@googlegroups.com.
To post to this group, send email to lojban@googlegroups.com.
Visit this group at http://groups.google.com/group/lojban.
For more options, visit https://groups.google.com/d/optout.

