# mail/lojban-list thread b60f7a1943c6-questions_about_lojban | root 4999df3f-bbbe-4885-997a-2c204183d092@googlegroups.com | 2 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2015-01-25T19:17:18Z | afkecatha@gmail.com | 4999df3f-bbbe-4885-997a-2c204183d092@googlegroups.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/1422213438.b60f7a1943c6df3a.jbomohi:2,S
Hello Everyone!

Following below is an email I recently sent to an email adress I found on 
lojban.org. I was redirected to this forum, and I was told I would be able 
to get better answers here. If any of you are willing to answer some of the 
questions asked, It would help me out a lot! Thanks in advance!! The email:

L.S.

My name is Afke and in my philosophy class we have recently discussed the 
Sapir-Whorf theory, and currently my classmates and I are working on a 
project concerning whether this theory is, according to us, correct or not. 
We are doing this through the means of setting up a hypothesis and testing 
this hypothesis on the basis of applying it to a specific case. Our group 
has chosen the Lojban language as our case, and we were very excited to 
have come across your website and discovering that the Lojban community is 
still very active. Therefore we thought it might be possible to contact you 
and ask you some questions concerning our project, which, if it is of no 
inconvience, we would very much like for you to answer.

Assuming that you are familiar with the idea of the Sapir-Whorf theory, 
which claims that people speaking a different language will percieve 
reality in a different way, our main question is whether you would agree 
with this theory or not. Does being able to speak in a different, logical 
language also mean that you are able to think in a different, logical 
manner? And seeing that Lojban (most probably) is not your first language, 
do you believe that people are able to learn to change the way they 
percieve reality, just like they are able to learn a new language? So for 
example, does someone who can speak a Native American language as well as 
regular English have the possibility to view reality in two different ways? 
Is this the reason you are so interested in Lojban, because it enables you 
to think and percieve the world more logically? And if not, where did your 
interest for the Lojban language come from?

If it is possible for you to answer these questions, we would like to hear 
from you soon! 


Thanking you in advance!

Sincerely,

Afke van Aller

-- 
You received this message because you are subscribed to the Google Groups "lojban" group.
To unsubscribe from this group and stop receiving emails from it, send an email to lojban+unsubscribe@googlegroups.com.
To post to this group, send email to lojban@googlegroups.com.
Visit this group at http://groups.google.com/group/lojban.
For more options, visit https://groups.google.com/d/optout.


=== 2 | 2015-01-26T00:02:37Z | Stela Selckiku <selckiku@gmail.com> | cajhgu=8kpt6rbxxmqrz1yvftoawrldncz7bhpjvwqdftwrak+g@mail.gmail.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/1422230557.b484274f3fdded23.jbomohi:2,S
On Sun, Jan 25, 2015 at 2:17 PM, <afkecatha@gmail.com> wrote:

>
> Assuming that you are familiar with the idea of the Sapir-Whorf theory,
> which claims that people speaking a different language will percieve
> reality in a different way, our main question is whether you would agree
> with this theory or not. Does being able to speak in a different, logical
> language also mean that you are able to think in a different, logical
> manner?
>


At first when I started studying Lojban I thought the Sapir-Whorf theory
seemed quite interesting, and I was looking forward to experiencing for
myself whether I thought it was true. But then years of casual chatting in
Lojban didn't subjectively seem to change my thought processes much at all,
so I pretty much forgot about the idea actually, or I guess I started to
think that it wasn't a very coherent hypothesis. But I started to take it
seriously again just very recently when I've actually starting trying for
the first time to think all the time all day primarily in Lojban, and it
actually started to feel weird.

I feel I should explain that "logic" as such has little to do with the ways
in which Lojbanic thinking is deeply strange. Learning the logical
operators in Lojban surely changes one's mind, but not in any distinctly
different way than learning the same logical operations in the context of
English, so far as I can tell. What's distinctly different about Lojban,
and pervasively different, is its neutrality. By this I mean not just its
famed "klunu'i" or cultural neutrality, though we do our best at that. What
I mean by neutrality is a certain tasteless central neutral flavor that is
the heart and soul of Lojban. Lojban in its deepest hidden secret self is a
plain unsalted cracker without the cracker, a blank canvas without the
canvas without the blankness, an empty space but without all the pesky
salty sour somethingish flavor of any disturbing presence of any emptiness.

Perhaps the most perfectly Lojbanic of Lojban sentences is the sentence "
", the empty sentence, which of course asserts nothing at all about
anything, and does so in perfect elegance. All of Lojban springs from this
emptiness. The sentence "prenu", person, shares little of the deep
character of English sentences like "there is a person" or "there are
people", because really it does nothing put throw the stone of personness
into the perfect emptiness. One single perfect ripple spreads across all of
creation. To assert existence, truth, knowledge, particularity, takes
adding other different words-- "prenu" puts only its otherwise flavorless
personness into a void. English does not have such sentences. English does
not even have that void. So indeed, I'm increasingly coming to believe, an
English speaker does not nearly as often have such thoughts.



> And seeing that Lojban (most probably) is not your first language, do you
> believe that people are able to learn to change the way they percieve
> reality, just like they are able to learn a new language? So for example,
> does someone who can speak a Native American language as well as regular
> English have the possibility to view reality in two different ways?
>


I've learned just a little of a Native American language (Potawatomi). Even
with the tiny amount I've learned it's obvious that the language itself
directly implies a radically different perspective on the world. The
animacy marking for instance doesn't correspond to any concept in European
languages/philosophies of which things are animate, and so learning it
necessarily means entering into a very different perspective on the world.

I don't think it's impossible at all to learn to see from a deeply
different perspective, it's just rather difficult and it's not clear at
first why you should bother. Learning a new language to the level where you
begin to feel the deep differences in its perspective takes many many many
hours of study.



> Is this the reason you are so interested in Lojban, because it enables you
> to think and percieve the world more logically? And if not, where did your
> interest for the Lojban language come from?
>


I was once a conlang shopper. That's what I've started calling it, by
analogy to how people are said to "shop" for a church to attend. Some
people just want to learn a conlang and they don't know which one. I
learned some Esperanto, as most do. And I learned a few words of Klingon,
etc. But Lojban is where I've made my home.

I like what Lojban is but I like even more what it's in the process of
becoming. It feels to me like a giant conlanging project still in progress,
just in further progress than any individual conlanger's project has ever
gotten. What I like about language is making up meanings, ways of
expression, the subtle interesting bits, I don't care about starting over
from scratch and choosing a new word for "cat." I was happy to learn that
here "mlatu" is cat, and "lat" is the short form, but then even more
interested to later learn when someone made "jbolatmi'a" Lojban-cat-laugh
for LOLcats captioned in Lojban, and I'll be excited of course if I made a
-lat- word and see other people using it, but I'm most of all looking
forward to learning a thousand more words with -lat- in them from a
thousand new Lojbanists as they join us. To me a new language of this
complexity and richness being born in front of our eyes is a remarkable
unusual special treasure.


mu'omi'e la stela selckiku

-- 
You received this message because you are subscribed to the Google Groups "lojban" group.
To unsubscribe from this group and stop receiving emails from it, send an email to lojban+unsubscribe@googlegroups.com.
To post to this group, send email to lojban@googlegroups.com.
Visit this group at http://groups.google.com/group/lojban.
For more options, visit https://groups.google.com/d/optout.

