# mail/lojban-list thread bf74b27a4df2-lojban_talks,_xu_le_skami_cu_tirna | root 44b84580.401594d5.016c.0f63@mx.gmail.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2006-07-15T01:34:57Z | "M@" <lojban-out@lojban.org> | 44b84580.401594d5.016c.0f63@mx.gmail.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/1152927297.bf74b27a4df274b9.jbomohi:2,S
So a while ago I promised everyone a quick and easy guide to making computer
audio recordings sound good enough for indie movie use.  Now that we're
entering the translation phase of L&P I suppose now would be as good a time
as ever to release it. 

 

 

 

There are only two important aspects to good recording; picking up the
signal, and not picking up any other noise.  Everything else revolves around
that Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR).  Once the audio is successfully digitized
many things can be done to modify it, however, for the sake of a consistent
product from a distributed talent base it is best not to attempt any digital
audio editing and let one person who is acting as audio editor for the whole
project do all of the work.  Thus, this guide is only about getting a high
quality (that is, a good SNR) signal into the computer.

 

The most obvious sources of noise (where noise is anything audible that
isn't the desired signal) are obvious:

Anything that moves

Centralized-air comfort systems

People elsewhere

Communications (telephone, IM, cell phone, neighbor's dog, etc)

Computers (especially the one doing the recording)

 

For the most part, simply disabling/stopping/removing/otherwise-silencing
the noise maker is enough, but the case of the computer being used as the
recording medium is a little trickier.  Lucky for us there is radio shack,
where $7 is enough to buy a 1/8" miniphono extension cable.  To eliminate
the noise from a computer (quiet as it may be, the mic will still pick it
up, and it will detract from the SNR) simply extend the microphone cord such
that the recording can be made in a partitioned off area (optimally another
room).  Additionally, laptops often run with their fans turned off or on low
speed with occasional bursts of high speed for cooling, if you have a laptop
and decent timing (wait for high speed to end then hit record) the issue can
be solved without any extensions at all.

 

Other harmful things to the SNR are less obvious, but for the most part
they're just as easy to fix:

Gain too low

Gain to high

TPS problems

Echoes 

RFI

 

Gain is the % of possible volume that the computer regards various input
signals as.  If the gain is too low the recording will sound quiet (ie low
signal) and require normalization, which will amplify the background noise
as well.  If the gain is too high the microphone will supply a signal larger
than the computer regards as 100% volume and clipping will occur (think
plateau instead of rolling hills).  A good example of this throughout the
beginning of jbocradi episode 1.  The key to correctly setting the gain is
rehearsal (which is a good thing to be doing anyway), open Audacity (yay
open source) and click the recording level meter, this will give you real
time feedback about the sound levels coming in from the mic.  Now, rehearse.
The loudest part of your dialogue should bring the meter to between the -6
and 0 marks.  If it exceeds 0 the gain is too high, and audacity will alert
you to this fact by keeping the far right bars (just past the 0 mark)
illuminated red.  To reset this meter simply click it twice and try it again
with a lower gain (the adjustment bar beside the mic icon).  If the meter
never gets above -6 turn up the gain.

 

TPS reports are the sharp explosive noises made by the letters T, P and S.
Think about a time you've overheard whispering from the next room, you only
hear the TPS reports, everything else is too quiet.  Ordinarily your brain
just cancels the extra volume, but microphones aren't that smart.  The
beginning of jbocradi ep 1 has a few TPS problems.  In reality this is the
exact same problem as having too much gain, but since these letters are so
much louder, if you dial down the gain to accommodate you end up losing over
all quality because it will later have to be equalized back up.  The
solution is a wind canceling microphone attachment.  They can be had for $3
at radio shack.  They're large and black, and look ridiculous on small mics
(see the pic of mine), but they work miracles for TPS canceling.
Installation is simple, especially if you're up to speed with modern
prophylactic techniques.  Also, B causes TPS reports, but that wouldn't have
been as funny.

 

Echoes are familiar to everyone, and they're easy to get rid of, just make
sure the room that you have extended the microphone into is large and full
of oddly shaped things (preferably soft ones).  Sofas, beds, tables,
pillows, desks, and shelving units make excellent echo cancellers because
they break up the planarity of echo-causing walls.

 

RFI stands for Radio Frequency Interference, and can cause all kinds of
weird noises to be recorded that the person never hears.  I'll spare you the
physics of why this happens, but the tip to be garnered here is don't have a
cell phone in the same room as you're recording, even if it's set to silent
and vibrate has been turned off.  If it is activated by someone calling it,
it will respond by blasting a very "loud" RF signal back to the nearest
tower, but in so doing it will cause a small current in the wires of your
sound system which (once amplified) is enough to cause odd clicking/buzzing
noises.

 

Once you've taken care of all of these easy things, the next step is to go
buy a nicer microphone, especially if you have a very deep voice like I do.

 

I hope this guide helps!

 

--teryret.

           
