# mail/lojban-list thread 1d3b7cd27881-how_are_you_today%3F | root e1bdkdv-0001f3-7p@chain.digitalkingdom.org | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2004-06-24T02:41:38Z | emma Obocha <emmaobocha@eriga.lv> | 5edd66f0f335267fc7239825c27e80f12892832f@jbomohi.invalid | mail/lojban-list/cur/1088044898.346baad0890ce60b.jbomohi:2,S
E.M.CHAMBERS (NIGERIA)
120  AWOLOWO ROAD IKEJA LAGOS.
TEL: 234-803-4289058
FAX:234-80-554637
E-mail: emmaobocha@moldova.cc 
 L-G NIGERIA 

                        
FROM SENIOR BARRISTER EMMA OBOCHA.

Dear Friend


Please, do not be offended if this message comes to you as I ought to have sought your consent and approval before e-mailing this proposal I acted as I did due to the importance and urgency of this business. Which ever way you may look at it, let it please you to respond quickly either negatively or positively.

I am Barrister Emma Obocha , personal attorney to a national of supposedly your country who used to work with Shell Development Company in Nigeria a contract Staff and who was also instrumental to the construction of the International Cement Company, Nigeria. Hereinafter shall be referred to as my client for over ten years. On the 21st of October, 1997, my client, his wife and their only daughter, were involved in a car accident along Badagree express Road on holidays to Kaduna while driving their personal car. 

Unfortunately, all occupants of the vehicle lost their lives. As his lawyer,
I was contacted and all necessary burial arrangements were made and the remains of the family buried in the public cemetery. Since then I have made several enquiry’s to the your embassy here and others to locate any of my clients either blood families or the extended relations. My concerted search proved abortive. After these several unsuccessful attempts and as the last resort, I decided to track his last name over the Internet, to see if I will be lucky to locate any member of his family, hence I contacted you. Perhaps, you may not be related to him but it behooves on us to seize this golden opportunity to salvage his savings since I could not locate any relation of his either dead or alive.

I have in my records his documents where he left behind the sum of Thirty million United States of American dollars (US$30 million) in a Security company ,I have contacted you to assist me in repatriating this fund left behind by my client before it gets confiscated or declared unserviceable by the Company where this huge amount was deposited. The Company has issued me a notice to provide the next of kin or have his Consignment confiscated within the next twenty one official working days as the policy of the Company is to overrun over Seven years of unservice able .They have a veritable excuse as they knew that my client was dead. Since I have been unsuccessful in locating the relations all this while, I seek your consent to present you as the next of kin to the deceased since you have the same last (Names) names. This is to enable us salvage the proceeds of his account and get it paid to you instead. I have this obsession that if the directors of the Company confiscated the money and enrich their pockets, it might not be put into proper and useful ventures to benefit the poor masses of this world. 


I wish to use part of my share to donate to charitable organizations and churches. Therefore, should this proposal appeal to you and on receipt of your positive response, we shall then discuss the sharing ratio and modalities for transferee. I have all necessary information and legal documents needed to back you up for the claim. All I needed is a willing foreigner who will be honest, trustworthy and transparent both in business and spirit with his or her unalloyed co-operation to enable us see this transaction through. 

I guarantee that this will be executed under legitimate arrangements that will protect you from any breach of the law. Please get in touch with me by e- mail . You can request my phone number for further discussion on this..

Thanks and have my best regards.

BARRISTER
EMMA OBOCHA.
Alternative E-mail: emmaobocha@moldova.cc 


