# mail/lojban-beginners thread 55b15f7c7c16-new_beginner | root e1kmth8-00081q-0o@sys24.mail.msu.edu | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2008-07-27T00:01:00Z | Lawrence John Rogers <roger158@msu.edu> | e1kmth8-00081q-0o@sys24.mail.msu.edu | mail/lojban-beginners/cur/1217116860.55b15f7c7c165bf7.jbomohi:2,S
Introduction and Getting Started 

Hi all, 

Maybe you know me from the main mailing list.  Maybe not. 

My name is Lawrence and I am interested in learning Okrand's Klingon 
language. 

I am interested because I am a linguist and polyglot-in-training.  However, 
I also lead the dicipherment, dissemination, and development movement for 
Okrand's Atlantean language and I'm trying to get ideas on how to do it. I'm 
also reaching out to you fellow Okrand Conlang speakers. 

I'm also entertaining the idea of developing a logo-phonetic writing system 
for Klingon based on Okuda's artwork and the Klingon language.  Who would 
use it, I'm not sure, but my thing is writing systems so instead of a book 
out of me you're likely to get a 900 character writing system. 

So what I've done so far: 

I tried to become a member and order the book.  It may not have gone through 
and I'm waiting for the qempa to be over to get Dr. Schoen's attention.  Do 
you have any suggestions? 

Can anybody help me out learning Klingon before the book comes?  I've 
learned like 20+ languages and I've been studying linguistics for 6 years 
(not to brag) so my language-learning style is really unusual.  I dislike 
the standard textbook and prefer the Professional or Non-professional 
Grammar, although I secretly long for a mix of the two. 

In my thread in the Main List (what are all the lists called and function?), 
someone gave a brief summary of the entire language.  That sort-of stuff is 
where its at for me. 

Are there any links?  Which books should I buy when?  Does anyone recommend 
something like compiling a personal word list?  Any linguists out there?  
Wanna-be linguists? 

And please, try to be constructive and encouraging.  There's some guys on 
the main list who don't understand that people are here of their own free 
will and don't have to take their demented verbal abuse.  Surely you also 
expect to attract flies with honey, not vinegar. 

Any help? 

Lawrence Rogers 

P.S. Is it too soon to get a Klingon name?  Do I chose it or am I assigned 
one? 






