# mail/lojban-beginners thread 98e7b5232c8e-habits_are_your_friends | root a0efdb610808231329s248f49ebiff9995752a1d7678@mail.gmail.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2008-08-23T20:29:59Z | Brett Williams <mungojelly@gmail.com> | a0efdb610808231329s248f49ebiff9995752a1d7678@mail.gmail.com | mail/lojban-beginners/cur/1219523399.98e7b5232c8e3578.jbomohi:2,S
     Lojban has a wonderfully productive grammar, which can take you as deep
as you want to go into twisty mazes of sentence construction, but I don't
think it's ever been emphasized enough that you don't actually have to
reinvent the wheel every time you say something.  Most of the Lojban that's
spoken (on IRC at least) is small variations on the same short familiar
patterns.  Here's some examples:


     "broda"

.i cinri
 -- Interesting. (Something interests someone.)
.i banzu
 -- Enough. (Something is sufficient for something.)

     Just a gismu or brivla on its own.  This sentence form is so easy that
it may seem like cheating, but I assure you, this is a high-class
full-fledged 100% genuine Authentic Lojbanistan Made sentence shape.  If
you're worried and confused by Lojban's grammar, I encourage
you to lean heavily on this shape.  You can't get it wrong, so you can't
worry about getting it wrong.  Here's a story for you in this form:

     .i smani .i xagji .i cadzu .i catlu .i plise .i viska .i djica .i cpacu
.i gleki .i citka .i plise .i citka .i gleki .i smani .i surla .i sipna
     Monkey. Hungry. Walking. Looking. Apple. Seeing. Wanting. Getting.
Happy. Eating. Apple. Eating. Happy. Monkey. Relaxing. Sleeping.


     "brode broda"

.i xamgu sipna
 -- Good sleep.
.i gleki kelci
 -- Happy play.

     You can put another gismu (or other brivla) in front of the first.  You
only have to learn one feature of Lojban's grammar, the relationship between
seltau (se tanru) and tertau (te tanru), in order to use this form.  Not
only that, but the relationship between seltau and tertau is surprisingly
easy to learn: It could be anything.  It's a primordial vagueness.  Lojban
is full of this exact bland flavor of vagueness, so getting a taste for it
will advance your Lojban a lot.  It's not hard to learn at all, it's just
hard to swallow.  Absolutely blandly impossibly vague; no kidding.
  Here's the same story for you using two-part tanru:

    .i xagji smani .i cidja djica .i clani cadzu .i citka catlu .i xagji
smani .i plise viska .i mutce gleki .i plise cpacu
    Hungry monkey.  Food desire.  Long walk.  Eating look.  Hungry monkey.
 Apple seeing.  Very happy.  Apple taking.

    .i plise citka .i kukte vrusi .i gleki cinmo .i kalri kanla .i
pezli surla .i morji cisma .i masno pensi .i ckire sipna
    Apple eater. Delicious taste. Happy emotions. Open eyes. Leaf relaxing.
Memory smiling. Slowly thinking. Grateful sleeper.


     "lo brodi zo'u broda"

.i lo plise zo'u citka
 -- An apple; ate.
.i lo cerni zo'u gleki
 -- A morning; happy.

     The word "zo'u" is used for making what's called topic-comment
sentences.  The structure of a sentence with "zo'u" is that you give a list
of things that you're going to talk about, and then you say "zo'u", and then
you start to talk about them.  It's a useful form for some logical
structures like "for all X and all Y there is some Z such that..." because
it allows you to give the arguments up front in the proper order, etc.  It
also, by convention (I would state the convention like this: arguments given
in the prenex which do not appear in the body are assumed to have been
elided in the body in some unspecified position), can be used for pithy
little vague sentences like "lo finpe zo'u citka" (a fish-- eating), which
is vague about the role the fish plays (whether it's eating, or being eaten,
or even watching someone else eat).  In order to use this form you need to
know only one place, the first place of the "brodi" brivla, which is the
object referred to by the "topic" part of the sentence-- you don't have to
specify what relation that object has to the "comment" bridi, so you don't
have to know any of the places of that brivla.
  Here's a "zo'u" version of our story:

    .i lo smani zo'u xagji .i lo clani zo'u cadzu .i lo cidja zo'u djica .i
lo cidja zo'u nitcu
    A monkey-- hungering.  A long one-- walking.  Some food-- wanting.  Some
food-- needing.

    .i lo plise zo'u viska .i lo smani zo'u gleki .i lo plise zo'u cpacu .i
lo smani zo'u citka
    An apple-- seeing.  A monkey-- feeling happy.  An apple-- getting.  A
monkey-- eating.

    .i lo pezli zo'u surla .i lo morji zo'u cisma .i lo pensi zo'u masno .i
lo ckire zo'u sipna
    Leaves-- relaxing.  A rememberer-- smiling.  A thinker-- slow.  A
grateful one-- sleeping.


     "lo brodi cu broda"

.i lo xamgu cu klama
 -- A good one comes.
.i lo pimlu cu farlu
 -- A feather falls.

    This is perhaps the most classic form; it's somehow stereotypical.  For
this form you need to know only two
x1 places, and the same object fills both of them.  The
"lo" takes out a referent which is the
x1 of the first brivla, and then putting that into this sentence says
that it's also the
x1 of the second brivla.  "lo plise cu
kukte"-- the thing we're talking about is both an apple,
and delicious.  As a general rule, you can reverse the
two brivla and get another true sentence saying the same
thing from another angle-- "lo kukte cu
plise", a delicious thing is an apple.
  Here's that story in this form:

  .i lo smani cu xagji .i lo smani cu cadzu .i lo smani cu xagji .i lo smani
cu nitcu
  A monkey is hungry. A monkey is walking. A monkey is hungry. A monkey is
needing.

  .i lo plise cu zvati .i lo plise cu melbi .i lo smani cu cpacu .i lo smani
cu gleki
  An apple is there. An apple is beautiful. A monkey acquires.
A monkey is happy.

  .i lo plise cu kukte .i lo kukte cu plise .i lo smani cu citka .i lo smani
cu nelci
  An apple is delicious. A delicious is an apple. A monkey eats. A monkey
likes.

  .i lo smani cu surla .i lo morji cu cisma .i lo masno cu
pensi .i lo ckire cu sipna
  A monkey relaxes. A rememberer smiles. A slow one thinks. A grateful one
sleeps.




    A lot of the Lojban you'll see spoken in real life, like on #lojban,
is in a simple bridi form such as those above.  They may be slightly harder
to recognize in the wild, because often they will be decorated with free
modifiers (evidentials, attitudinals, etc)-- when you don't know "za'a" from
"zo'u", that's a lot of noise which throws you off of being able to
immediately recognize the basic shape of the sentence.  Here's an example
from IRC just now:

dbrock: .i .u'i di'u jai tance nandu
(sentence link) (amusement) (previous statement) (is part of an abstraction
that) (tongue) (difficult)
Hehe, that's a tongue twister!

    (He had just said "coi co'e co cmaci".)  The basic form here is just
"ko'a brode broda", a prosumti and a tanru, pretty simple, plus there's two
twists: a free modifier (.u'i) and an implicit abstraction (jai).  Here's
another example:

cmacis: .u'u mi ca citka
(sorry) (me) (now) (eating)
Sorry, I'm eating now.

    The basic form is just "ko'a broda", a prosumti and a brivla.  The tense
"ca", now, is in front of the selbri (which is very idiomatic for tags
because that's one of the places (the end of the sentence can work too)
where you don't need to say "ca ku"), and ".u'u" is a free modifier.  OK
one more:

dbrock: .i na'e banzu cinri mi .u'u
(sentence link) (other than) (sufficient) (interesting) (me) (sorry)
Not interesting enough to me, sorry.

    The basic form here is "brode broda ko'a", a tanru followed by a
prosumti (putting the sumti into the x2 slot, in the case of cinri, the
person interested).  So ".u'u" probably didn't throw you off, because I just
mentioned that it's a free modifier, but you might not know "na'e", which is
the scalar negator, other than (on an implied scale), (and which affects
only the following tanru element (not the whole bridi like "na"), so Daniel
was saying that something is interesting, just not *sufficiently*
interesting).

    Most of the bridi you'll encounter in actual spoken (well, typed) Lojban
are like these, very basic sentence forms with a few tiny twists that make
them superficially more complicated.  Embedded bridi are more rare than
simple ones, and the vast majority of embedded bridi are in very habitual
familiar forms (such as the form "ko'a broda lo nu brodo" (which is so
common that I've been intending to write y'all an essay sometime soon on
*other* ways to use "nu". :)  (lo brodi cu nu brodo, lo nu broda cu nu
brode, broda nu brodi, etc) ) ).

    As well as being a language of deep possibilities, Lojban is a living
human language used for practical conversational purposes.  It's a large &
strange toolbox, but please don't let that intimidate you; just take a few
of the simple tools, and get to work seeing what they can make.  With a few
basic sentence forms at your command, it's possible to express almost
anything.

mu'o mi'e se ckiku
(over, i'm "The Lock")

