# mail/lojban-list thread 4686a656c2a3-general%3A_logfest_reminder | root m0qe92c-00001ec@xiron.pc.helsinki.fi | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1994-06-16T04:24:02Z | Logical Language Group <lojbab> | 199406160424.aa18964@access3.digex.net | mail/lojban-list/cur/771740642.36ee9c0b9bef535e.jbomohi:2,S
A reminder that the annual meeting of the Logical Language Group, and an
associated gathering known as 'LogFest' will be held at my house in Fairfax
VA on the weekend of 15-17 July, possibly extending over to the 18th when we
will undertake to go at least a full day speaking only Lojban.  Most LogFest
activities are educational/introductory - you needn;t be a skilled LOjbanist
to participate.

We invite all Lojbanists to consider participating that weekend, if you can
get here.

If you cannot get here, you may still be able to participate.  We will
almost certinly be on at specific times using IRC with Nick Nicholas, and 
possibly with other non-local Lojbanists (Colin Fine- are you interested in
trying to get a group together that weekend in the UK?), and others might
consider getting together with us on IRC and/or getting groups together
in your local area for a secondary LogFest (we have nice concentrations of
Lojbanists in the SF Bay Area, Boston area, and LA area, among others, but
none of theose areas has managed to find someone willing to organize such an
event - I can supply names and address and phone numbers - which may not be current - to anyone who wishes to contact others in your local area.  Please son't
ask unless you really intend to follow through, since my pre-LogFest time is
already heavily committed.

The major event for LogFest this year will be discussion of the dictionary and
John Cowan's draft papers on the grammar and Nick's paper on lujvo place
structures (which will be included in the dictionary).  I intend to have some
kind of draft dictionary in print by LogFest, but exactly how drafty it will
be remains to be seen.

We will also have various games and activities for all levels of Lojban use, 
and if tradition repeats itself, many very late hour discussion of anything
under the sun.

Families are welcome if you let us know they are coming and are willing to
help out with sleeping bags, food costs, etc.  John Cowan is bringing his
wife and 7 year old daughter, and we will have Avgust and Angela here (ages
6 and 8), so there will inherently be someone helping supervise/occupy the
kids.

We have traditionally asked for donations from people attending.  Our costs
have tended to run around $20-30 per person, but not everyone contributes, so 
we ask people to give what they can.

Contact me with questions
lojbab


