# mail/lojban-list thread 9ee442e7e808-agenda_item_for_annual_lojban_meeting | root 199406240605.aa17276@access1.digex.net | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1994-06-24T06:05:49Z | Logical Language Group <lojbab@access.digex.net> | 199406240605.aa17276@access1.digex.net | mail/lojban-list/cur/772437949.9ee442e7e80833c0.jbomohi:2,S
I THINK I got all of you who have good on-line addresses...

LogFest is coming up on 15-17 July, wiuth the anuual meeting scheduled for the
17th (Sunday).  I presume that Sylvia and John Cowan will be there along with
Nora and me.  I haven;t heard anything from the rest of you.  I am presuming
that overseas Lojbanists will NOT be at the annual meeting,a nd you who are
members should send a proxy, and/or indicate your opinion on what I am going
to make the first real agenda item for the meeting (as opposed to the
parliamentary rules-based reports).  See following...

I would especially like to know whether, among you, Twery, David Young, and
Jorge will be present.  I know that Tommy has a conflict since he is helping
rin an SF con that weekend.

Proposed new business item:
For the last 3 years we have been waiting, indeed suffering, from pc (John
Parks-Clifford) not being present on Lojban List for technical discussions.
Actually it has been longer than that, but it has been mostly in the last 
3 years that the net has become the principal venue for technical discussions,
and pc, though our primary consultant on matters of tense and logic, has been
left out.  During those 3 years, his university has been 'in the process' of connecting everybody on-line so that they would have net access, but for a lot of
reasons, apparently including incompetence, this connection has not yet
happened (pc has been given a userid twice, but at last report, he still
cannot even log on to the main computer that is tied into the Internet).

I am proposing therefore that LLG finance getting pc a dial-up net connection
sufficient to support our normal email and ftp work, at least until his
university link actually and demonstrably works.  Yesterday in passing, I
ran across mention of two commercial access services in teh St. Louis area,
so we know there is the possibility of such access.  I don't know anything 
about costs, but this digex account is running around $30/month so I would 
hope the costs would be about that for pc.

I am not generally proposing that LLG pay for net access for all principal
workjers, since most of us don;t need it, and/or are/would be connected to
the net even if LLG idd not exist.  I wouldn;t be, hence LLG pays for my
account.  pc likewise has no especial reason to be connected other than
LLG work (though he will certainly profit professionally from being able to
contact other logic researchers, he also is making do quite fine without this
right now).

Normally, I'd just have the Board decide on this, but the timing is tright to
have all members decide on this at LogFest.

Current voting members of LLG are (lastnames in no particular order)
R. LeChevalier, N. LeChevalier, Athelstan, Cowan, Hodges (who has submitted
a resignation that I have not dealt with since I hope we will talk him out of
it at LogFest, since he is attending), Rutiser, Young, Whitlock, Wieners,
Garnett, Stein, Twery, Parks-Clifford, Nicholas, Fine, Llambias, Vilva.

I think that is 17, if I am counting right at this time of night.

Comments, proxies, and plans regarding LogFest are welcome ...

lojbab


