# mail/lojban-list thread dc1977762596-lojban_www_server_news | root 199409060512.aa28778@access3.digex.net | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1994-09-06T05:12:49Z | Logical Language Group <lojbab@access.digex.net> | 199409060512.aa28778@access3.digex.net | mail/lojban-list/cur/778828369.dc1977762596a4d8.jbomohi:2,S
I would encourage you to make it clear as to teh availablilty of all ftp
materials from the server (assuming that this is true, and have such
access be easy to get to from the top page.  Several people have asked for
info about Lojban who started from the www page, but did not seem to know
about the ftp site or the wide range of mateirals there.

Also - note that the LogFlash file in the software section of the ftp site
is NOT the LogFlash software, but only the data file updates.  THis is a
frequent FAQ.

Cowan and I may have sets of messages on some topics that are better threaded
than subject lines would indicate, but our files are by no means complete
analyses of the Lojban List archive, but rather ad-hoc mail folders we create
when we read mail, and then (in my case) much edited to make them smaller
and more readable.

YOu might, rather than trying to thread the entirety of the List archive,
come up with a set of topics (perhaps 100 or so) and sort all traffic on the
list into those topics (with a big file for misc).  Thus, FAQs wouls form a
single file/thread rather than a whole bunch of them.  (Culture words is
the one that comes to mind since it just came up again today).  One file
could be beginner sentences and the correction analysis thereof.  Lojban
texts would be another category, that might need its own hierarchy, but that
is one area where I think my own archives are at least as complete if not more
complete than the ftp site.

Since some of these files may be very large if sorted/threaded this way (my
file from the discussion of ZAhO is over 500K, a useful feature would be
the abity to skip ahead n messages or n lines if reading it on-line, where
n is chosen to make browsing afile before downloading it more practical.

I still haven't taken more than a cursory look myself, since setting up the
local version is probably not as good as the real thing, and I don't seem
to get good emulation when I try to use lynx - the overwriting seem to be
off my a few characters a lot of the time - possibly not using the right
emulator, or maybe my emulator is flawed.

In any event, I am happy eith the response it has generated and thank
you greatly for what you have done and are continuing to do.

(Did I send a disk to you with your much belated JL - which I hope you have
gotten by now - and was it useful if I did?  I know I was thinking of doing so,
but I got time-pressured as thedays and weeks passed on without the stuff getting into the mail).

lojbab


