# mail/lojban-list thread e6a66c83dc68-new_cmavo_list_on_ftp_site | root m0qds9z-00006ic@xiron.pc.helsinki.fi | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1994-06-14T06:38:53Z | Logical Language Group <lojbab> | 199406140638.aa26212@access1.digex.net | mail/lojban-list/cur/771575933.d1df0335fd2e1768.jbomohi:2,S
I have just uploaded to ftp.cs.yale.edu directory /pub/lojban
a new version of the cmavo list.

Major changes since the last (6/94) version:

Addition of a few cmavo that have been proposed since then and approved by
consensus.

Addition of several example compounds relating to numbers and motion tenses.
These are to enhance the dictionary that will be built out opf the cmavo list.

Addition of BAI conversions (e.g. vemau) to cover ALL places of the gismu
(and one lujvo) from which the various BAI tags were derived.  The old set
consisted only of those that seemed useful and which had good English
equivalents.  About 30 compounds were added.

Addition of some possible gismu and lujvo comparisons for most members of UI.
Colin Fine took a cut at this a while back, and I have incoporated this
effort with minor changes and some additions.  Note that these comparisons
are NOT definitions.  In many cases the scale implied in an attitudinal
and its negated form would correspond to a lujvo that has not yet been made.
I coined a few, but trying to exactly match the UI list did not seem particularly productive right now.  I'm hoping that the Jimbobs that commented on this
effort originally will look at the entries that I've made.

---

I have also made minor clarificational changes and some wording changes to
better fit the dictionary-making effort.  These should be almost unnoticeable.

(BTW, the last version was the 6/93 version - THIS is the 6/94 version.
Sorry about the typo above.)

Open issues and ongoing efforts:

I need Nick Nicholas to come up with a definition for "kau" since he has by
usage extended it a bit beyond its original purpose as listed in the cmavo 
list.  Please send me a new "line" to replace the exisiting one in the file,
Nick.

The proposal for an ordinal ROI tense quantifier remains unresolved.  This
would be a 1-word addition to the file, with perhaps a couple of example
compounds added as well. I will hopefully be talking to pc about this within
the week.

Jorge Llambias is doing (or planning to do) some work on wording of cmavo
entires in support of the dictionary effort beyond what I have done.  This
will probably be mostly editorial.

I presume that Veijo Vilva will have to modify his WWW server to accept the
new file.  I'll let him announce when this has happened.

-----

The file is cmavo694.lis

I will leave the old file there for a while for people who may want to
do "diff" listings, though I'm not sure how useful this might be since I
may have changed some columns, or the order of entries.  But it will go
away within a week or so, to minimize confusion.

I hope to post a 'final' version before LogFest of the cmavo list in the form
that it will be going into the dictionary.  I am still hoping to have a
review draft of the dictionary at LogFest for people to look at.

Therefore make any important comments quickly.

(I will be posting some gismu-list related stuff within a couple of days.
There is only one open issue on the gismu list, which I will resolve quickly.)

lojbab
----
lojbab                           Note new address:    lojbab@access.digex.net
Bob LeChevalier, President, The Logical Language Group, Inc.
2904 Beau Lane, Fairfax VA 22031-1303 USA                        703-385-0273
           Ask me about the artificial language Loglan/Lojban.


