# mail/lojban-list thread 05d45edd0a1e-temporary_absense_from_net | root 9302141718.aa22361@daily.grebyn.com | 4 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1993-02-14T17:18:04Z | lojbab@grebyn.com | 9302141718.aa22361@daily.grebyn.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/729710284.05d45edd0a1eb573.jbomohi:2,S
I hope you are setting nomail, and or unsibscribing and resubscribing at the
new address.

No need to apologize.  I didn't think it was much of a flamewar, and it got 
people talking on the list again (no text posted for ages, much less 
commentary).

The place structure paper is important, since something from it, or some
form of it, must go in the dictionary, which is the first book.  If I go
with your work with minimal changes, a lot of explanation must be provided,
or no one will know what is going on.  (I'm hoping that Cowan can come up
with an automatic processor that will expand you abbreviated codes for
place structures into something more long-winded that minimizes people
having to cross-lookup, but I can't count on it).

I have just gotten back to work on the dictionary this weekend (working on
the glossary and selma'o summary).  That will be the first book done.  Cowan
is meanwhile working on the textbook cleanup, correcting the gobs of errors,
and unclarity that has come to be recognized (hence the recent question).
He got a bit burnt out on writing papers, at least in part because no one,
especially me, seems to have time to review them.

There is a problem also that is standing in the way of his working on it
right now - a lack of motivation for another reason.  You and Iain both
tried writing Mex texts, presumably based on his paper, and he is decidedly
unhappy with the results, though he hasn't said exactly why.  I gather that
from his perspective, both of you made many errors, and he is bothered from
a) a general lack of willingness to confront you guys on the situation
(perhaps because he isn't that sure of his position, perhaps because he
basically isn't a person who likes to deal withg opposition) and/or b)
a general distaste for trying to read MEX text, which is after all one of the
more boring things to read (and he isn't much in the habit of reading
Lojban texts either).  (All this is one reason the Mex paper didn't go into
JL17, and is unlikely to go into JL18, either.  But I somehow have to get
him motivated, since the obvious prospect that we have problems in MEX, the
most untested of the areas of the language, makes me nervous about a baseline,
especially one encoded in the stone tablets of the dictionary/reference.
This is at this point just between you and me, and he doesn't know I'm
writing to you (and I haven't talked to Iain either).

I doubt that the garmmar book, consisting of all of his papers, and the ones
I have to do as well, will be done within a year, unless we do fast and well
on the dictionary and textbook.  This is partly due to lack of time, but more
so due to costs - I haven't figured out how to finance one book, much less
three.  And we lost our shirt last year, even though Prothero's commitment
means that we probably are safe from bankruptcy for another year or so.

BTW, I mailed Major's JL on Thursday via normal air mail (rather than the
bulk shipment that I've used in the past), which should speed the time it gets
to him, and hence to you.  He has said nnothing about who and how many are 
meeting his terms, and/or helping out his distribution costs, so I don't know
who he will be sending to, but you are certainly going to be included, I'm
sure.  (Did Johnstone and/or Mansfield, the two people who have expressed
interest in Lojban in the last several months, give you any impression of 
significant interest; you said you talked to Tim M., and Johnstone (I think 
that's his name) remains occasionally active on conlang, but they haven't said
much to me.  I also have never heard again from that poet/conlanger in Melbourne
who printed our gismu list in his language.

I'd still like to spark j Guy's interest just a bit more.  He is a person who
could really add some stylistics to the language, since he could write from
the perspective of languages and cultures that we know little about.  He's
never sent me an address though, and has only some of our electronic stuff -
and I'm not quite sure what.

Hope to see you again soon. With luck, I'll have 3 good weeks of dictionary
work, which won;t be enough, but at least will get me moving and probably
motivated again.

lojbab



=== 2 | 1993-02-14T17:19:56Z | lojbab@grebyn.com | 9302141719.aa22364@daily.grebyn.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/729710396.a310f0927bd7b2e6.jbomohi:2,S
By the way, there was an excellent posting on sci.lang (and maybe s.c.e) on
natural-language-like irregularities in Esperanto.  I plan on reposting it
with comment to conlang, and if you don;t get it, please ask me for it when
you get back on line

lojbab



=== 3 | 1993-02-17T14:40:30Z | nsn | ejricmhig5g.a.fhe.st0klb@chain.digitalkingdom.org | mail/lojban-list/cur/729960030.d6be54ab9d88ed5f.jbomohi:2,S
I'm back on the net, and apparently I'm on mullian for a bit. I'll try and
convince the local guru to let me stay on mullian, as I'm officially an
ElecEng postgrad (I'm doing Cognitive Sc via Elec this year); if not, I'll
resurface on a CompSci machine. You'll be kept duly posted.

I've mailed you $100 AUS ($66 US) for my LLG account, in an International
Money Order.

Nice to see the list talkative; pity I don't have the time right now to
actively participate, but I think some sense of direction is arising from
out the rubble.

Place structure... well, it won't be a typical Cowan paper, all nicely
didactic. The first section will have to be --- in which I show the basic
manner of deriving place structures. It's basically your method: pick
from the places of the component gismu those places which are relevant to
the definition of the {lujvo se sinxa}; couple with some dikyjvo-derived
ideas on how the places should be ordered for predictability by other
users presupposing no familiarity with the {lujvo se sinxa}. However (and
this need not delay dictionary production), I intend to use Ivan's classes
of tanru as a tool in analysing which types of lujvo place structure go
with which types of component tanru. Some clear patterns are already
discernable.

The write-up of the first section may start as soon as Friday, certainly
next week. I'm finishing my summer job Friday, and start classes week
after next.

It is a pity things have turned out as they have with MEX. Personally I
doubt MEX will ever be worked through to our satisfaction. I'm not sure
which action I should take given John's reluctance to confront me on my
usage. I'm tempted to produce more MEX {zirjbo} :) and force matters to
a head --- but if John is really taking matters to heart (btw, is he getting
cc's of your mail these days?) then that's obviously not diplomatic.

I have heard nothing from Johnstone (and no longer subscribe to conlang;
my summer job has meant I've had to minimise net access time). Tim Mansfield
I bump into every now and then; he's on soc.bi, and I'm his net Esperanto
tutor. He's very busy with thesis work right now (haven't had Esperanto
exercises from him in a month), but he was genuinely interested in Lojban.
He made the inevitable proglang/conlang analogy: Lojban is to Scheme as
Esperanto is to Pascal. (Having spent a month programming in Pascal, I
wouldn't be too smug about that if I were an Esperanto-supremacist. On the
other hand, I have a distaste for LISPoids. Incidentally, whatever happened
to Guy Steele? It was only when I read _The Hacker's Dictionary_ that I
realised we had a celebrity in our midst on lojlist in '90!)

I offered to meet Jacques Guy earlier last year, but in our brief email
correspondence, he doesn't seem really interested in Lojban: he finds it
too complex for his needs. To tell the truth, a Basic Lojban could readily
be constructed (and with our tendency to use transformational techniques
and deep structures to analyse Lojban, such a Lojban would be a helpful
bootstrap for the remainder of the language, as well as an interesting
language in its own right: the *essentials* of Lojban are quite slim. 
Btw, I don't know how much putative scientific interest a Basic Lojban
would have; I for one consider transformational accounts of language quaint,
and in fact virtually all linguists these days do --- Chomsky has fled from
it to GB, which to me seems like Ptolemaic epicycles.)

Talk to you soon.

"Kai` sa`n swqh~kan t'akriba` piota`,           N N O  nsn@munagin.ee.mu.oz.au
 kai` sa`n plhsi'aze pia` [h [w'ra te'sseres,   I I L  IRC:nicxjo RL:shaddupnic
 sto`n e'rwta doqh~kan eutuxei~s."              C C A  University of Melbourne.
  K.P.Kaba'fhs, _Du'o Ne'oi, 23 E'ws 24 Etw~n_  K H S  *Ceci n'est pas un .sig*



=== 4 | 1993-02-17T17:53:00Z | lojbab@grebyn.com | 9302171753.aa05930@daily.grebyn.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/729971580.04c4f8b1cf196f44.jbomohi:2,S
I choose to leave John out of some of my cc's, but he does sometimes get on
my account on grebyn and read my incoming, even when I don't explicitly relay
to him (it is after all an LLG account, not my personal one), so I never
really count on privacy.  My intent was to indictae that I had bnot consulted
with him before telling you what I did, and I may or may not be reading his
attitude correctly.

Guy Steele dropped Lojban List a few months ago, but I suspect that it was lack
of time, not interest.  He met with Athelstan and Nora and me when we went to 
Boston in '89 and also did a review on JCB's last edition of L1.  I haven't
heard from him, but he may be another casualty of "The Books - Stupid!"
syndrome.  Lojban List has been slowly losing people the last year, because
people not actively interested in reading text and advanced discussions like
we've had at times get no lighter stuff to attract them.  (At one time Cowan
could be counted on for occasional tidbits of lightweight linguistic info
and anecdotes and examples, but not since he took on responsibility for 
doing everything that Lojbab isn't doing, as he seems to.  He no longer wants
to write the occasional gratuitious advertisement on Linguist list or sci.lang
either - the piece that answers some question, but giving further the Lojban
perspective on that question.  Probably 1/3 of our mailing list has come from
such netvertisements.)

Another "name", though less visible, is Andrew Koenig, who I'm told is a big
C++ guru.  I know little about him, but he has been a steady low-key supporter
since the beginning (as has Guy Steele).  I understand that Chip Salzenburg
is a net.personality of note, but I don't know if this extends to professional
esteem.  he is also a supporter.

If "Basic Lojban" is a subset of the full language, I agree and favor it as a
pedagogical tool at least.  Trying to identify such a subset would be difficult.

I do not expect your paper to be the same as Cowan's or mine.  This may or may
not mean that some reworking is necessary for flow, etc. when they appear in 
a book with other things (your writing style differs from mine, and people
including me find it dense at times - but then mine can be too for others).
But you by far more than anyone else have thought about the place structure 
issue (from an orthodox point of view as well as from a jimc point of view)
and hence are the person to set down a basic doctrine for people to shoot
arrows at (as well as the person to explain just what you did in assembling 
the lujvo place structures that you did).

lojbab


