# mail/lojban-list thread 104506ad2eb6-no_subject | root pf8gvkubdkn.a.4le.vt0klb@chain.digitalkingdom.org | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1993-06-02T06:59:32Z | Logical Language Group <lojbab@GREBYN.COM> | pf8gvkubdkn.a.4le.vt0klb@chain.digitalkingdom.org | mail/lojban-list/cur/739004372.104506ad2eb6168b.jbomohi:2,S
06/01/93 Lojban baseline rafsi list part 4 of 5

This list is in the public domain.  However, we ask that this header be
retained on all distributed copies, so that people have some idea what
they are looking at and how to get more information.

For information about the artificial language Loglan/Lojban, please
contact The Logical Language Group, Inc.  (LLG).  We ask that you
provide a paper-mail address as well as an email address if appropriate
The LLG is funded solely by your contributions, which are encouraged for
the purpose of defraying our costs (for both electronic and paper
distribution.)

Bob LeChevalier, President, The Logical Language Group, Inc.
2904 Beau Lane, Fairfax VA 22031-1303 USA                        703-385-0273
email:  lojbab@grebyn.com


xa    xav          6
xabju         xa'u dwell
xadba xab          half
xadni xad          body
xagji              hunger
xagri              reed
xajmi xam          funny
xaksu xak          use up
xalbo              levity
xalka xal          alcohol
xalni              panic
xamgu xag     xau  good
xampo xap     xa'o ampere
xamsi xas          sea
xance xan     xa'e hand
xanka              nervous
xanri xar          imaginary
xanto              elephant
xarci xac     xa'i weapon
xarju xaj          pig
xarnu              stubborn
xasli              donkey
xasne              sweat
xatra         xa'a letter
xatsi xat          1E-18
xazdo xaz zdo      Asiatic
xe    xel          5th conversion
xebni xen     xei  hate
xebro xeb bro      Hebrew
xecto xet cto      100
xedja xej     xe'a jaw
xekri xek     xe'i black
xelso xes          Greek
xendo xed     xe'o kind
xenru xer     xe'u regret
xexso xex          1E18
xindo xin          Hindi
xinmo xim          ink
xirma xir     xi'a horse
xislu xil     xi'u wheel
xispo xip          Hispanic
xlali     xla      bad
xlura     xlu      influence
xotli xol     xoi  hotel
xrabo rab          Arabic
xrani         xai  injure
xriso xis     xi'o Christian
xruba xub          buckwheat
xruki xuk          turkey
xrula rul          flower
xruti     xru      return
xukmi xum     xu'i chemical
xunre xun     xu'e red
xurdo xur     xu'o Urdi
xusra xus     xu'a assert
xutla xul          smooth
za'i  zaz          state abstract
za'o          za'o superfective
zabna zan     za'a favorable
zajba zaj          gymnast
zalvi zal          grind
zanru zar     zau  approve
zarci zac     zai  market
zargu zag     za'u buttock
zasni zas          temporary
zasti zat     za'i exist
zbabu bab          soap
zbani              bay
zbasu     zba      make
zbepi     zbe      pedestal
zdani     zda      nest
zdile     zdi      amusing
ze    zel          7
ze'e          ze'e whole time interval
ze'o  zev     ze'o outward
zekri zer     zei  crime
zenba zen     ze'a increase
zepti zep          1E-21
zetro zet          1E21
zgana     zga      observe
zgike     zgi gi'e music
zifre zif     zi'e free
zinki zin     zi'i zinc
zirpu zir     zi'u purple
zivle ziv vle      invest
zmadu     zma mau  more
zmiku     zmi      automatic
zo'a  zon     zo'a tangential to
zo'i  zor     zo'i inward
zu'o  zum          activity abstract
zukte zuk     zu'e act
zumri     zmu      maize
zungi zug          guilt
zunle zul          left
zunti zun     zu'i interfere
zutse zut tse      sit
zvati k    zva      at

                         Lojban lujvo-MAKING

- Rules for Lojban word forms - The lujvo must be formed according to
Lojban's word-formation rules.  The constraints of Lojban word forms
forbid any lujvo from ending in a consonant, so that words most commonly
found in the final position of a tanru have been prioritized to have a
rafsi that ends in a vowel.  However, words found in initial positions
often form better sounding combinations if their rafsi end in a
consonant.  (Also, because we usually recognize words by the consonants
in them rather than the vowels, the rafsi of form CVV and CV'V are
harder to memorize.  Note:  C and V in abbrevaiations of this sort stand
for any Lojban consonant and vowel, respectively.  The apostrophe is the
Lojban "'", which is considered neither a consonant nor a vowel.)

Certain sounds are forbidden to occur next to each other (so- called
'impermissible medial' consonants), and must be separated by a
'hyphen'-sound, the "uh" of "sofa", represented in Lojban by the let-
ter 'y' (this letter is found only as a hyphen, in lerfu, the words for
letters of the alphabet, and along to represent the hesitation noise.
It is thus not normally considered a 'V' is the C/V convention scheme.
Indeed, "CyC" is considered a consonant cluster in Lojban morphology,
albeit a hyphenated one).  In addition, a CVV or CV'V rafsi at the
beginning of any lujvo must either carry the penultimate stress, it must
be 'glued' to the remaining rafsi with a syllabic 'r' or 'n' sound, or
the rafsi falls off into a separate word, a cmavo.  (In addition, a CVV
or CV'V rafsi followed by another CVV or CV'V rafsi in a 2-term lujvo
must have the 'r' or 'n' added, or the consonant cluster mandatory in
any brivla in not present, and the rafsi break up into two separate
cmavo.)

- Multiple rafsi to choose from - Because of these rules, there is
usually more than one rafsi usable for each gismu.  The one to be used
is simply whichever sounds best to the speaker/writer.  There are many
valid combinations of the possible rafsi.  Any rafsi for a given word is
equally valid in place of another, AND ALL MEAN THE SAME THING.  There
is an optional scoring component to the lujvo-making algorithm which
attempts to systematically pick the 'best' one; this algorithm tries for
short forms and tends to push more vowels into the words to make them
easier to say.  The Japanese, Chinese, and Polynesian speak- ers will
prefer this; Russians have a different aesthetic, since they are used to
saying consonant clusters.  But these are not necessarily the criteria
you will wish to use.

- lujvo have ONE meaning - While a tanru is ambiguous, having several
possible meanings, a lujvo (one that would be put into the dictionary)
has ONE MEANING.  Just like gismu, a lujvo is a predicate which
encompasses one area of the semantic universe, with one set of places.
Hopefully this is the most 'useful' or 'logical' of the possible
semantic spaces.  A known source of linguistic drift in Lojban will be
as Lojbanic society evolves, and the concept represented by a sequence
of rafsi that is most 'useful' or 'logical' changes.  At that time, it
might be decided that we want to redefine the lujvo to assume the new
meaning. lujvo must not be allowed to retain two meanings.  So those
that maintain the dictionary will be ever watchful of tanru and lujvo
usage to ensure this standard is kept.

One should try to be aware of the possibility of prior meanings of a new
lujvo, especially if you are writing for 'posterity'.  If a lujvo is
invented which involves the same tanru as one that is in the dictionary,
and is assigned a different meaning (including a different place
structure), linguistic drift results.  This isn't necessarily bad; it
happens in every natural language.  You communicate quite well in
English even though you don't know most words in the dictionary, and in
spite of the fact that you use some words in ways not found in the
dictionary.  Whenever you use a meaning different from the dictionary
definition, you risk a reader/listener using the dictionary and
therefore misunderstanding you.  One major reason for having a standard
lujvo scoring algorithm is that with several possible rafsi choices to
consider, a dictionary is most efficient by putting the definition under
the single most preferred form.

You may optionally mark a nonce word that you create without checking a
dictionary by preceding it with "za'e".  "za'e" simply tells the
listener that the word is a nonce word, and may not agree with a
dictionary entry for that sequence of rafsi.  The essential nature of
human communication is that if the listener understands, then all is
well.  Let this be the ultimate guideline for choosing meanings and
place structures for invented lujvo.

- Zipf's law and lujvo - This complication is simple, but is the
scariest.  Zipf's Law (actually a hypothesis), says that the length of
words is inversely proportional to their frequency of usage.  The
shortest words are those which are used more; the longest ones are used
less.  The corollary for Lojban is that commonly used concepts will tend
to be abbreviated.  Speakers will choose the shortest form for
frequently expressed ideas that gets their meaning across, even at the
cost of accuracy in meaning.  In English, we have abbreviations and
acronyms and jargon, all of which are words for complex ideas used with
high frequency by a group of people.  So they shortened them to convey
the often-used information more rapidly.

The jargon-forming interpretation of Zipf's Law may be a cause of
multiple meanings of words in the natural languages, especially of short
words.  If true, it threatens the Lojban rule that all lujvo must have
one meaning.  The Lojbanist thus resigned accepts a complication in
lujvo-making:  A perfectly good and clear tanru may have to be
abbreviated, if the concept it represents likely will be used so often
as to cause Zipf's Law to take effect.

Thus, given a tanru with grouping markers, abstraction markers, and
other cmavo in it to make the tanru syntactically unambiguous, in many
cases one drops some of the cmavo to make a shorter (incorrect) tanru,
and then uses that one to make the lujvo.

This doesn't lead to ambiguity, as it might seem.  A given lujvo still
has exactly one meaning and place structure.  But now, more than one
tanru is competing for the same lujvo.  This is not as difficult to
accept or allow for as it might seem:  more than one meaning for a
single tanru was already competing for the 'right' to be used for the
lujvo.  Someone has to use judgement in deciding which one meaning is to
be chosen over the others.  This judgement will be made on the basis of
usage, presumably by some fairly logical criteria.

If the lujvo made by a shorter form of tanru is already in use, or is
likely to be useful for another meaning, the wordmaker then retains one
or more of the cmavo, preferably ones that clearly set this meaning
apart from the shorter form meaning that is used or anticipated.  In
Lojban, therefore, shorter lujvo will be used for a less complicated
concept, possibly even over a more frequent word.  If two concepts
compete for a single rafsi sequence, the simpler concept will take a
shorter form, and the more complex concept will have some indication of
its more complex nature added into the word structure.  It is easier to
add a cmavo to clarify the meaning of a more complex term than it is to
find a good alternate tanru for the simpler term.

A good lujvo-composer considers the listener, and a good lujvo
interpreter remebers the difficulties of lujvo-making.  If someone hears
a word he doesn't know, decomposes it, and gets a tanru that makes no
sense for the context, he knows that the grouping operators may have
been dropped out, he may try alternate groupings.  Or he may try using
the verb form of the concept instead of the first sumti, inserting an
abstraction operator if it seems plausible.  Plausibility is key to
learning new ideas, and evaluating unfamiliar lujvo.


               SHORT FORM OF THE LUJVO-MAKING ALGORITHM

The rules for the lujvo-making algorithm are stated formally.  This may
cause it to appear intimidating to a casual reader, and to seem harder
than it really is to use.  The following brief form, is more practical
to learn.

1. Find all rafsi forms for the component words. 5-letter forms can only
occur in final position, 4-letter+y form, and CVC short forms can only
occur in non-final positions.  Make all possible combinations of the
rafsi for the component words, keeping the order of the component words.

2. Between any two impermissible medial consonants (see 5c of the formal
algorithm), stick a y.

3. Where there is a consonant triple formed where two rafsi join, if it
is impermissible (see 5d of the formal algorithm), stick in a y where
they join.

4. If you have a CVV rafsi at the beginning, add in an r hyphen after
it.  An n is used instead if the letter after the hyphen is also an r.
However, in a tanru with only 2 parts, do not add a hyphen when the
second rafsi is a CCV-form.

5. Always stick in a y hyphen after a 4-letter form, which is the gismu
without its final letter.

6. Perform the "tosmabru" test.  Starting from the left, look for a
sequence of 2-or-more CVC rafsi ending with (the first) hyphen 'y', or
one-or-more CVC rafsi followed by an endDofDword CVCCV full word rafsi
with a permissible medial as the CC.  If either case occurs, look at
each consonant pair, and if all of them are permissible initial
consonant pairs, insert a 'y' hyphen between the first consonant pair.


