# mail/lojban-list thread 74553f28c1fd-new_animal_gismu | root kxwn-ulebsp.a.wje.ut0klb@chain.digitalkingdom.org | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1993-06-23T06:46:43Z | Logical Language Group <lojbab@GREBYN.COM> | b711f4c4409d963da3c61431eb73431081683ead@jbomohi.invalid | mail/lojban-list/cur/740818003.c6d051260915d817.jbomohi:2,S
I will merely observe that the status quo has a solid majority of the LLG
membership as extreemeely minimalist on the gismu list,, and thus highly
resistant to adding new ones if there is even a mediocre lujvo available.

I have also indicated to Cowan that I think by intent, the word curnu can
be extended to include all muticellular invertabrates (single-cells are
covered under selci or jurme), especially since most of them are essentially
worms of some sort anyway.  Cowan seemed to agree, in which case mollusk
is covered by  shell-worm.

If jukni is extended to cover all non-insectoid arthropods, claw-jukni
works well for crab/lobster.
If jalra includes all of the Orthopteran super-order and its descendants,
it includes cockroaches, termites (which otherwise do not fit bilogiically
even if they do fit the 'common household pest' definition), and grasshoppers
crickets, and locusts, and a few others are covered, and it shouldn't be too
hard to make restrictive lujvo, if not great ones.  Alternatively civla
and jalra and sfani could take non-biological definitions, referring to
pests of the insectoid variety that respectively 1) suck blood or otherwise
parasite on living creatures 2) craw on or in surfaces rather more than they
fly 3) fly.  I would then be prone to add spiders as a clearly identifyable
4 th kind, bees/wasps/hornets as a 5th kind, and use cinki to refer to
bugs/beetles and all others that are arthropods, but not one of the categorized
specialties.  Crab then becomes claw-cinki.

On the whole, we have avoid having gismu defined technically as opposed to
by common lay interpretations.  Thus 'winged mouse' would be perfectly
fine for 'bat' if that is something that is done by several other
cultrues, as I suspect it is.

THus we can more or less solve most of the possibilities without adding
gismu, and whether or not the solution is thought 'good', the existence
of two different approaches, means that proposals are unlikely to fly
at LogFest without really surprising changes.  Remember that a few LogFests
ago, 'gumri' for mushroom, and already existing gismu, was deleted in favor
of the to-me-gross 'umbrella-mold', in the interest of cutting the number of
gismu (that one grates because it happens to be one of the two deleted
gismu that I cannot forget, and always want to use - the other being the
unusable word for 'chin' which got overrwritten when we moved none other
than 'cinki' on top of it in order to giveit a good rafsi.  Both of these
changes occured several years ago, before the first gismu baseline.

lojbab


