# mail/lojban-list thread a119e5e1e1c0-lojban | root 199310300813.aa22645@eli.cs.yale.edu | 3 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1993-10-30T08:11:08Z | Logical Language Group <lojbab@ACCESS.DIGEX.NET> | 199310300813.aa22645@eli.cs.yale.edu | mail/lojban-list/cur/751968668.a119e5e1e1c0fe8c.jbomohi:2,S
UC> This holds if the deep structure is based on some kind of predicate
UC> logic (maybe the Chomsky kind) -- which, at least in my case, is true.
UC>
UC> >What this means for linguistic theories if Lojban develops 'native
UC> >speakers' i.e. children who can learn the language through natural
UC> >processes, is to me an interesting question.

In Lojban, we have the privelege of DEFINING our deep structure.
Whether this deep structure has anything to do with human internal deep
structure (assuming such really exists) is always open to question and
if the two are too different, the language will either not be learnable,
or will be learned by a native learner is some way different from our
predicted deep structure; i.e. there will be noticeable differences in
surface structure unless by some chance there is an isomorphism or
direct transform between our designed deep structure and the human deep
structure.

UC>  Lojban, in comparison, takes more
UC> mandatory arguments than most (natural) languages -- which in turn
UC> makes usage of case tags less often.  I think case tags in Lojban are
UC> like prepositions in English?

Lojban has predicates so far with between 1 and 5 arguments.  All of
them are 'mandatory' in that they are presumed to have some value in all
sentences, but all of them are optional, i.e. they may be ellipsized if
obvious from context, or irrelevant.

The Lojban case tags are very much like English prepositions except that
each tag is very narrowly defined in terms of semantics.  The set of
tags is theoretically open-ended, in that any predicate can be used as a
case tag - thus resulting in a subordinate clause of an odd sort.

UC> So when we say "the sheriff of Nottingham", we mean "that which is
UC> the sheriff of Nottingham".  ("is the sheriff of" should be a single
UC> word in Lojban, I guess?)

Close "the thing that sheriffs Nottingham feels better to me, since it
is always safer to look at Lojban predicates as verbs without even an
implied copula "is".  The verb "sheriffs" could be a single word in
Lojban (no one has suggested on, yet - we haven't talked much about law
enforcement %^)

UC> I wonder if there is still
UC> something corresponding to the English "of" -- or do we have to say
UC> "that which is-the-A-of B"?  If it's the latter case, then "the
UC> sheriff" would become "that which is-the-sheriff-of zo'e".

There is no exact equivalence of "of".  The words be/bei are just
grammatical separators to attach any arguments onto the'sheriff'
argument.  If you actually did do the sentence as a relative clause,
then there is an optional relative pronoun that wouldn't likely be used.
"zo'e" is seldom expressed except when a place is omitted, and other
methods tend to be used more for that situation than zo'e, too.  There
is an indefinite case tag which can only be translated as "of", and "of"
is also the proper case tag/preposition to use when you stick an
argument on with no case tag that is beyond the defined number for a
predicate (the 3rd argument of a 2 place predicate, for example).

Other than this, the implied link that is represented by "of" is not
lexically represented in Lojban:

la djan. pulji la NATinxem.
John     polices within-the-organization-labelled-Nottingham.
(straining the definition of 'pulji' just a little)
[enforcing laws ...(unspecified).]

UC> I'm sorry about my ignorance in linguistics, but what does
UC> "appositive" and "relative clause/phrase" mean?

Appositive, is when two alternative ways of describing the same argument
are opposed:  John, the sheriff, came to town.  (where John IS the
sheriff) Relative clause is similar, but a sentence/clause is used to
define the argument.  Usually explicitly or implicitly marked with a
relative marker, (in English most commonly "which", "that", or "who").
A relative phrase is halfway in between, having a second argument which
is related to the first argument linked to the first one:

relative clause: John, who rode a white horse, came to town.
relative phrase: John, more-than Jim, likes me. (where "more-than" in Lojban
is a preposition: la djan ne semau la djim. cu nelci mi

UC> As long as exchanging the places of arguments (both mandatory
UC> and optional) is allowed, this special role of the first argument
UC> makes no difference.

It is allowed, but fairly highly 'marked'; i.e. unusual and wordy unless
you have a really good reason.

UC> Yes... Actually I suppose that Lojban can even be SOVO, in the case
UC> of >=3 arguments.

Yes.

UC> What is the difference between the word-making processes
UC> of Loglan and Lojban, which made the two vocabularies different?

We used newer population data, and the much higher population of China,
and the greater literacy among the entire population in Mandarin since
1950 enormously increased the relative weight of Chinese.  Similarly for
Hindi in India, whereas the number of native speakers of English may
actually be declining since the British Empire collapsed (2nd language
speakers are not weighted fully, and in any case, a 5% increase in
native speakers of Chinese can outweight a 15% increase in English
speakers because the raw number base is so much larger.  Using newer
data meant that we dropped German, French, and Japanese out of the
word-making entirely, and added in Arabic.  If we had gone to 7 or even
8 or 9 languages (Loglan originally used 8 and we used 6), the next 3
languages nowadays would be Malay-Indonesian, Portuguese, and Bengali.

We also used a good Pinyin dictionary with official Chinese
interpretations for the IPA values of each letter.  Jim Brown used a
hodgepodge that was usually Wade-Giles, and presumed that the
romanization was accurate as to pronunciation, from what I've been able
to tell.  He also either didn;t have a good dictionary, or failed to
check himself, because there are a lot of strange word choices fro his
Chinese (I say this since I did the Chinese dictionary work for Lojban
myself.  I don't know Chinese, and therefore checked doubkly hard to try
to get words that meant the right thing - oftentimes the Loglan choice
backtranslates into a less-common denotation of the English word that
has nothing to do with the intended meaning.  Of course, we probably
have some silly choices, too, and since I didn;t KNOW Chinese, I may
have chosen words that are the rarely used variant over a common word.
I personally am looking forward to someone evetually looking at what we
did and systematic- ally telling us how bad we really did, but I'm sure
it was better than the original Loglan work by a large margin.

UC> I do have several friends who are interested in Loglan/Lojban, and of
UC> course I will send them copies of the materials.  Translation into
UC> Chinese should be easy.  I don't know much about linguistics research,
UC> but I am surely looking forward to distributing information in both
UC> China and Taiwan.

You will have us at your beck and call if you can do this.  WE REALLY
WANT native Chinese speakers to learn Lojban, given the weight we put on
the language.  I'm cc.ing this message to John Cowan, our chief
grammarian, who has done some serious reading on Chinese, though he
doesn't really know the language (he did a translation of a fable from
hakka Chinese a couple of years ago, though, if people are interested
and know that dialect).  John may have occasional questions about how
Chinese works for you and others.

lojbab




=== 2 | 1993-10-30T08:11:15Z | Logical Language Group <lojbab@ACCESS.DIGEX.NET> | 199310300813.aa22653@eli.cs.yale.edu | mail/lojban-list/cur/751968675.6e6e221bacd7e4f1.jbomohi:2,S
UC> So I guess one part of the Lojban learning observation is to see which
UC> kind of deep structure the users would define.  This choice would
UC> reflect the actual human internal deep structure, right?

Basically so.  I think rather that we will see if the language is
learnable as it is defined.  If so, then we know that there exists a
human-internal set of transformations from any deep structure that is
ingrained into our heads to the Lojban surface structures.  This then
would suggest some type of isomorphism with the Lojban
defined-deep-structure.

UC> The case tag system has some advantages, so I wonder if there are
UC> case tags for prepositions like "to" and "from", which are usually
UC> already expressed by mandatory arguments.  How do you say "What did
UC> you do to her?" in Lojban?

We don't have anything corresponding to the whole of English preposition
"to" or "from", especiallly including the example you give.  There is a
case tag for destination, and another for origin, but neither applies to
the example, nor to most uses of "from" and "to", only those with a
specific motion.  I would do the example as one of two versions
depending on emphasis.

Assuming ko'a represents "her":
do gasnu ma ri'i ko'a
You are agent in what-action, with-this-agency experienced by her.
or
do gasnu ma poi se lifri ko'a
You are agent in what action that is experienced by her
(which uses no case tags at all)

or
gau do ko'a lifri ma
With-agent-you, she experiences what?

ri'i is a generic experiencer case tag
gau is a generic agent case tag (the do-er of the action)

UC> >There is no exact equivalence of "of".  The words be/bei are just gram
UC> >separators to attach any arguments onto the'sheriff' argument.
UC>
UC> I thought "pe" is quite similar to "of".  So are there any differences
UC> between "le pulji pe la NATinxem" and "le pulji be la NATinxea bei"?

"pe" is similar to the generic "of" which is often the "genitive case"
in those languages that have such a thing.  But that is equating apples
and oranges - they are not grammatically similar and you cannot therfore
use them in nearly the same way (pe is not in any way a preposition, but
rather a binding word between two arguments).

le pulji be le NATinxem  (no "bei")
the police of-organization Nottingham
(be is serving to label the following argument as the 2nd place of pulji
which is the organization the police are associated with.

le pulji pe la NATinxem  (that should have been a "la" in the last one too)
The police that are in some way associated with Nottingham; i.e.
the police of Nottingham

Both versions can be translated to English "of", but that is not the
"meaning" of either, just the closest English colloquial approximation.

UC> >didn;t
UC> >have a good dictionary, or failed to check himself, because there are
UC> >of strange word choices fro his Chinese (I say this since I did the Ch
UC> >dictionary work for Lojban myself.
UC>
UC> Well, the problem of choosing between synonyms when making
UC> Loglan/Lojban words exists for not only Chinese.  I recall that for
UC> "see/view" the word is vinci/viska.  I guess "view" instead of "see"
UC> was chosen because it would be more consistent with words from other
UC> (especially European) languages.

Not quite that frame of mind.  We used several English synonyms and let
the computer decide which one matched up with phonemes from other
languages best.  In this case, you are correct that "view" was the word
chosen, but that may or may not have been because of similarity with
European language words.  We tried "see" as well.

Your guess on blood was correct - it is "ciblu".  Another word is a bit
harder, but highly recognizable once you think about it "blue" is
"blanu" bLANu and BLanU.

But I have heard that "brown" is not a color commonly used in Chinese.
I can't remember the word I obtained from the dictionary, but the result
was "bunre".  This may be a little less recognizable, especially if the
Chinese root we used is not well-known.

Also the algorithm might give a strange result because the word I got in
Chinese was a digraph, and the word making algorithm might have taken
part of each component resulting in something with no real recognition
at all.

I don't know any examples of this off hand, but I have the old Loglan
dictionary in front of me.  For the concept regular/cyclical/periodic,
Dr.  Brown used the Chinese "i lyu" by some Romanization, taking the
"il" to score as part of "rilri".  The Lojban word for the concept is
"diknu", by the way, and I know that the English component in the "ik"
from "cyclical".  Dr.  Brown's word for "powerful" is "lilpa" from
Chinese "li liang".  The Lojban word is "vlipa".  Dr.  Brown's word for
"screw/bolt" is "skori" from Chinese "lo so ding"; the Lojban word is
"klupe" where I do not know any of the etymology.  In the latter case,
the Chinese contribution appears to be the s and 2 vowels.  There are
probably comparable Lojban examples.

lojbab




=== 3 | 1993-10-30T08:12:15Z | Logical Language Group <lojbab@ACCESS.DIGEX.NET> | yfapaj-xz5l.a.xcc.460klb@chain.digitalkingdom.org | mail/lojban-list/cur/751968735.2d76e615b6edd44c.jbomohi:2,S
UC> > Not quite that frame of mind.  We used several English synonyms and l
UC>  > computer decide which one matched up with phonemes from other langua
UC>  > best.  In this case, you are correct that "view" was the word chosen
UC>  > that may or may not have been because of similarity with European la
UC>  > words.  We tried "see" as well.
UC>
UC>  Did you also choose from synonyms in the same way for other
UC> languages?
UC>  (esp. Chinese)

Yes and no.  Since I am a native English speaker, I have a much broader
knowledge of my language's vocabulary, and the tolerable limits of
memory hook than I do for other languages.  On the other hand, for other
languages, I sometimes was limited in synonym ability simply because the
dictionary did not list multiple possibilities that I could check on.
Also, different people did different languages, and one person was very
prone to only trying for a single word for each concept especially in
Hindi, which he could barely read.  (Arabic was a particular mixed bag,
since in addition to synonyms, you have to deal with various infix
vowels which affect recognition scores but often make little difference
in the concept as seen by an Arabic speaker - but of course we never
knew which forms the algorithm would prefer, so Arabic almost certainly
got shortchanged in the word making.  Chinese and Spanish probably had
the best representation among non-English, with Russian not too far
behind, though suffering from misunderstandings of Russian morphology
and phonetics.

So, Chinese is particularly well-covered, especially if you are finding
the synonyms we used relevant.  Probably not as well covered as English,
but there were probably two synonyms or more for manyif not most Chinese
contributions.

It is nice to know that you have chosen exactly the technique we would
prefer people to use (identify the language component, then use it as a
memory hook, rather than trying to go the other way).  Your testimony is
the most powerful statement for our approach I have had in a long time
(the recognition score technique has been under almost relentless attack
by American English speakers who would probably prefer the words to be
more recognizable.

lojbab
Cc: u7911005@[140.113.4.17] cowan



