# mail/lojban-list thread d49e4abf9a09-llg_legal_victory_now_official | root bmtzp9ttuvg.a.0nc.f70klb@chain.digitalkingdom.org | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1993-01-26T06:50:11Z | Logical Language Group <lojbab@GREBYN.COM> | 0dbec91dc46cbeed1fb41ab207b1ae9e7aa96829@jbomohi.invalid | mail/lojban-list/cur/728031011.f52605af08ffd79d.jbomohi:2,S
I have received notice from the Patent and Trademark Office, dated 13 January,
that the trademark on "Loglan" has been cancelled in accordance with the
appeals court decision of last summer.  A public notice should appear in a month
or two in the Federal Register (where all federal regulations and rulings
get posted).

LLG will not change its policy of using "Loglan" as the generic name of the
language or familyof languages that have evolved over the past 38 years from
the original concept by James Cooke Brown, using "Lojban" to refer to the
version of the language that we are supporting, or "Loglan/Lojban" when the
reference is to a property of Lojban that we believe is generally true of all
of the Loglans.  We will of course use "Loglan" in reaching out to the
community of people who might be familiar with the Scientific American
article from 1960, or who might have been involved with Loglan at one time
but gave up on itfor lack of time or because JCB's effort did not seem to
be going anywhere.  (We have done reasonably well in attracting these people
back to the Loglan project and support of Lojban).  As in the last sentence,
we will also use "the Loglan project" to refer to the research effort that
has led to the various versions of Loglan, including Lojban, especially when
talking about those goals for the language that JCB set forth earlier in the
project such as testing the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis.

Needless to say, everyone else may use the term "Loglan" in any way that they
choose, since the name is no longer protected in any way, and will not have
any fear of legal action if what they say displeases JCB and/or his organiz-
zation.

We have had no specific comment from JCB's organization on preferred ways
to refer to their version of the language, which they have continued to
call simply "Loglan" (derived from the English roots and not the Loglan
roots, as "Lojban" is).  We of course will not support calling it by the
simple name because that would cause confusion with the broader meaning that
we have long attributed to the name.  Thus pending further comment from
JCB or his organization, we will continue using the name "TLI Loglan" to
refer the The version promulgated by The Loglan Institute currently (and
various names usually associated with a date to refer to earlier versions
from which their version and Lojban have both evolved).

lojbab
----
lojbab                                                      lojbab@grebyn.com
Bob LeChevalier, President, The Logical Language Group, Inc.
2904 Beau Lane, Fairfax VA 22031-1303 USA                        703-385-0273

For information about the artificial language Loglan/Lojban, please
provide a paper-mail address to me via mail or phone.  We also have
limited introductory information available electronically.  The LLG is
funded solely by your contributions, which are encouraged for the purpose
of defraying our costs (for both electronic and paper distribution.)


