# mail/pod thread 1fd35d8768a6-the_most_complete_yiquan_training_course_ever_p | root 80016e7ad9d99547aa5b2329f2b7d62d@no-id-found.mhonarc.org | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2004-07-05T13:48:00Z | "http://yiquan.chinamartialarts.net" <cmabeijing@yahoo.com> | 80016e7ad9d99547aa5b2329f2b7d62d@no-id-found.mhonarc.org | mail/pod/cur/1089035280.1fd35d8768a68192.jbomohi:2,S
Title: Dachengquan Yiquan most famous experts training materials now available 
in english






   
    
  
  
    
  


   
     
         
          
        
         
           

              Grand Master, Doctor Yu Yong Nian

              Chinese National Chi Kung Research Council, American-Chinese Chi 
              Kung Research Group, Da Cheng Chuan Zhan Zhuang Chi Kung Research 
              groups (Europe).

              Among his most famous students is Master Lam Kam Chuen. 

              As the earliest students of Great Master Wang Xiang 
              Zhai was a young man who studied orthodox Western medicine and then 
              specialized in dentistry. His name is Yu Yong Nian. More...

            

        
         
           

              Grand Master Yu Yong Nian: 

              Fundamentals in Yi Quan Healing and Combat Theory- Training levels 
              with Zhan Zhuang.More...

               

        
         
          
        
         
          

        
        
          

             
          
        
        
          Master Shi Feng Qi 
               

              Master Shi Feng Qi has studied Yiquan with Yang 
              Demao, he started at the age of 19. Originated from Hebei Province, 
              he practiced Shaolin style before meeting his Master Yang. He uses 
              to explain to his students that before practicing Yiquan a friend 
              of him who was practicing Tong Bei Quan, used to beat him in combat. 
              But later after just a few years practicing Yiquan he beat his friend 
              with one punch knocking him down. - More 
            

        
      
    
         
           
               
                 
                Introduction

                    This web site is dedicated to those who want a direct access 
                    to the authentic Yiquan (also written Yi Quan,Yi Chuan, Yichuan, 
                    I Chuan, Ichuan, or Dacheng, Da Chengchuan...).

                    We reinforce the contents our site with materials from the 
                    Top Masters of Yiquan in Mainland China, all are undoubtedly 
                    skilled, because of their decades of practice, as an example 
                    Master Yu Yong Nian, in his 84 is cumulating more than 60 
                    years of interrupted practice..., but also by their pure proven 
                    lineage with the founder of Yiquan Wang Xiang Zhai.

                    We are proud to present here very rare articles, photos, clip 
                    videos on these Top experts often know through their disciples 
                    or foreign students.

                    

                    New! 
                    The most complete Yiquan correspondence course ever published 
                    is now available in 4 parts translated in english 
                    

                  

              
               
                 
                
                     
                      

                      

                      

                      

                    
                  
              
               
                 
                 
              
            
        
         
          
               
                 
                
                
                     
                       
                      The Founder 
                          Great Master Wang Xiang Zhai (1887-1963)

                          Greatmaster Wang Xiang Zhai was born in 1885 in Hebei 
                          province of China, near Beijing. Due to sicknesses he 
                          suffered as a child, he was lead to the great Xing Yi 
                          boxer Guo Yun Shen to teach him exercises that would 
                          improve his health. Wang was diligent and dedicated 
                          student. In fact, Guo was so impressed with Wang that 
                          he selected him as the preferred student and taught 
                          him all his secrets.[Guo Yun Shen already in an advanced 
                          age, was very strict in the training of the young Wang.

                          Even Grand Master Yu Yong Nian often remembers to his 
                          students one story which happens to Wang while studying 
                          with his Master Guo - 
                          More

                    
                  
              
               
                 
                 
                 
              
               
                 
                
                
                     
                       
                      Master Yao Zongxun 
                          (1917-1985)

                          Yao Zongxun was the student of the well-known Beijing 
                          martial artist Hong Lianshun, until Hong had a match 
                          with Wang Xiangzhai when Yao was only nineteen. Hong 
                          was defeated, and on this occasion both teacher and 
                          student became Wang’s disciples. 

                          Yao had uncommon stamina and spirit, after overcoming 
                          hard training with his Master Wang Xiangzhai, he eventually 
                          began to replace Wang Xiangzhai for challenges taking 
                          place in Beijing: contributing to propagate the legend 
                          of undefeatable Da Cheng Quan. In 1941 he received the 
                          title of “Ji Xian” (Heir of Xian) from Wang Xiangzhai 
                          himself, and confirmed in all his challenge his reputation 
                          of second generation Head Master of Yiquan.- More

                        

                    
                  
              
               
                 
                 
                 
              
               
                 
                
                 
                    
                       
                         
                        Yao Chengguang 
                            (born in 1953)

                            The twin brothers Yao Chengguang and Yao Chengrong 
                            were born in 1953. At age of 8 they started learning 
                            yiquan from their father Yao Zongxun, and continued 
                            it even in the hard time of Cultural Revolution (1966-1976), 
                            when whole family had to leave Beijing and work in 
                            the country. Most of Yao Zongxun's students lost opportunity 
                            of learning from him for some years. Fortunately his 
                            sons could learn from him even then. They worked together 
                            as horse herd in the grassland close to mountains 
                            (Changping area in Hebei Province). They continued 
                            training although they suffered from hunger and cold.- 
                            More

                          

                      
                    
                  

              
               
                 
                 
                 
              
               
                 
                
                    
                      
                       
                      The two brothers 
                        Wang Yongxiang (borned in 1947) and Wang Yongli (borned 
                        in 1949) 

                        belong to family quite famous for their traditional roots 
                        involved in Martial Arts. When they are young they followed 
                        their father Wang Binkui, Master Yao Zhongxun, and Master 
                        Li Yongzong to practice Yiquan, and have never stop practicing 
                        for nearly 30 years, researching and improving their martial 
                        techniques, and deepening their knowledge of an authentic 
                        boxing, adapted to real combat. - More
                    
                  
              
            
        
      
  
   
    
 
  
   
    Our email: 
        cmabeijing@yahoo.com

        China Martial Arts Ltd.

        Copyright @1999-2004 by China Martial Arts Ltd. All rights Reserved.

        http://yiquan.chinamartialarts.net

  

 

