# mail/pod thread 3c03baca4a86-anorthosite,attention_small-cap_stox_players | root gxycpnd2sfvvgsu@post.sk | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2004-08-29T07:55:01Z | Hannah Grimm <snhzyekkdct@post.sk> | gxycpnd2sfvvgsu@post.sk | mail/pod/cur/1093766101.3c03baca4a866005.jbomohi:2,S
Nichole Copeland,


The Growth ST0CK Report

Premier Platform Holding Company, Inc. (OTC: PPFM.PK)

Current Price: $.026

Imagine how well your portfolio would have done if you had the scoop
on the following stocks:
(OTC: AUML): Closed July 9 at $.  10. Traded over $4.00 on August 4.
Ama-zing. (Split 5 for 1 August 5th) Do the math.You may not know  a
lot about investing, but we're sure you can count.
(OTCBB:GSPM):  Closed  June 1st at $.01. Closed July 23rd at $.13 Up
1200%

Think some overowned, overblown  stock  like  Intel is going to move
like  that  anytime  soon?   Ordinary   Investors   Like   You   are
Turbocharging  Their Portfolios With Select High Potential Micro-cap
Stocks.Some of these stocks really do fly.

Let's Look at  Today's  Featured  Company:  Premier  Platform  (OTC:
PPFM.PK)  (Working  on  Acquisitions  and  a  $1.1  Million Investor
Commitment  in  Place)  AngioScan   Biotech  Inc.  has  developed  a
revolutionary early risk screening methodology for  breast  imaging.
PPFM is attempting to Purchase Up to 40% of this company.

About AngioScan Biotech  Inc:  AngioScan  BioTech combines metabolic
and  physiological  science  with  advanced  digital   thermographic
imaging  to create a new form of biotechnology called, the AngioScan
Thermogram. The AngioScan Thermogram System utilizes High Definition
Infrared Medical Imaging  techniques  to  generate accurate clinical
infrared photos of the angiogenic, (relating to the  blood  supply),
patterns   of   pathology   and   overall  physiological  health.  A
proprietary digital computational  analysis  process is performed on
the images in a  lab  to  identify  and  report  on  the  angiogenic
patterns.  The  reports generated are designed to provide physicians
with  critical  information  needed   for   the  early  detection  &
preventive intervention of; breast cancer, vascular disease, thyroid
imbalances, dental issues, and patterns relating to diabetes as well
as other pathological disturbances in the B0DY. The reports also are
instrumental in helping the physician to  easliy  monitor  treatment
progress.(Source: AngioScan Biotech's Website)

Recent Press Release Headlines: (Working on Acquisitions)
MONDAY AUGUST 2:   Premier Platform Holding Company, Inc.
Announces New Financing and Name Change.
WEDNESDAY JULY 14: Premier Platform Holding Company, Inc.
To Increase Stake in EverWell.
WEDNESDAY JULY 7:  Premier Platform Holding Company, Inc.
Announces Acquisition Plans.

Excerpt From the August 2nd Press Release:
LAS VEGAS, Aug. 2 /PRNewswire-FirstCall/
Premier Platform Holding Company,Inc. (OTC Pink Sheets: PPFM - News)
is pleased to announce  that  they  have  received  a  $1.1  million
investor commitment, and expect to close later this month. This will
enable  them  to complete their planned purchase of 40% of AngioScan
Biotech Inc. AngioScan  Biotech  Inc.  has developed a revolutionary
"early risk" screening methodology for medical breast  imaging.  "In
recognition  of  the  anticipated financing, we will be changing our
corporate name to  Premier  Medical  Technology Group," said Premier
Platform Holding Company's President  and  CEO  Richard  Hanson  and
Loren  Brink,  head  of  EverWell. "Also, investors should watch for
significant news coming  in  the  near  future," they concluded. Mr.
Brink was formerly  the  CEO  of  Health  Fitness  Corporation  (OTC
Bulletin  Board:  HFIT - News) from 1981 to 2000. They are currently
the largest corporate fitness/wellness  company in the country, with
over 390 sites in the U.S. and Canada.

Will  the  Stock  Blaze  Higher  from here? Many of these low priced
stocks have been absolutely EXPLODING  in price lately. If you think
so, consider taking a good, long look at PPFM.  Remember  the  name,
remember  the  symbol (PPFM). Like many of unknown stocks, one major
news announcement and this stock  could go ballistic!

DISCL AIMER: Information within this email contains F0RWARD  looking
statements  within  the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act
of 1933 and Section 21B of  the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Any
statements that express  or  involve  discussions  with  respect  to
predictions,     expectations,    beliefs,    plans,    projections,
objectives,goals, ssumptions or future events or performance are not
statements of historical fact and may be F0RWARD looking statements.
F0RWARD looking statements are  based on expectations, estimates and
projections at the time the  statements  are  made  that  involve  a
number  of  risks and uncertainties which could cause actual results
or events to  differ  materially  from  those presently anticipated.
F0RWARD looking statements in this action may be identified  through
the   use  of  words  such  as  projects,  foresee,  expects,  will,
anticipates, estimates, believes, understands  or that by statements
indicating certain actions may, could, or might occur. As with  many
micro-cap  stocks, today's company has additional risk factors worth
noting. Premier Platform  Holding  Company  Inc.  is not a reporting
company registered under the Securities Act of 1934. It has not  had
any  operations  or  business  for the past two years. Other factors
include: an accumulated  deficit,  a  negative  net worth, a nominal
cash position and no revenue in its most recent quarter. The company
is relying on financing  to  complete  some  transactions.  If  that
financing  does not occur, those transactions may not happen and the
company may not be able to continue as a going concern in which case
you could lose your entire  investment. The Growth Stock Report does
not represent that the information contained in this message  states
all  material  facts  or  does not omit a material fact necessary to
make the statements therein not misleading. All information provided
within this ema-il pertaining  to investing, stocks, securities must
be understood as information provided and not investment advice. The
Growth Stock Report advises all  readers  and  subscribers  to  seek
advice  from  a  registered  professional  securities representative
before deciding to trade in stocks featured within this em-ail. None
of the material within this report shall be construed as any kind of
investment advice or solicitation.Many of these companies are on the
verge of bankruptcy. You  can  lose  all  your money by investing in
this stock. The publisher of  The  Growth  Stock  Report  is  not  a
registered   investment   ADVIS0R.   Subscribers   should  not  view
information herein as legal,  tax,  accounting or investment advice.
Any reference to past  performance(s)  of  companies  are  specially
selected  to  be  referenced  based  on the favorable performance of
these companies.  You  would  need  perfect  timing  to  acheive the
results in the examples given. There can be  no  assurance  of  that
happening.   Remember,   as   always,  past  performance  is  ne-ver
indicative of future results  and  a  thorough due diligence effort,
including a review of a company's filings, should be completed prior
to investing.The Growth Stock Report has no relationship  with  AUML
and   GSPM.   In   compliance  with  the  Securities  Act  of  1933,
Section17(b),The  Growth  Stock  Report  discloses  the  receipt  of
sixteen thousand D0LLARS  from  a  third  party  (DMI, Inc.), not an
officer, director or affiliate shareholder for  the  circulation  of
this  report. Be aware of an inherent conflict of interest resulting
from  such  compensation  due  to  the  fact  that  this  is  a paid
adver-tisement. All factual information in this report was  gathered
from  public sources, including but not limited to Company Websites,
and Company Press Releases.  The  Growth  Stock Report believes this
information to be reliable but can make  no  gua-rantee  as  to  its
accuracy  or  completeness.  Use  of the material within this em-ail
constitutes your acceptance of these terms.




heaven digging debug elevate cranberry bullfrog manse lightweight forestry voice cyclist gem louvre baleful wilmington coquette wylie warble nation republic addle public horror trainman monk typo convocate ,schlesinger schofield bragg comptroller lice alleyway primacy barometer chromosphere interfere exorcist embolden blueback copernican acts irresistible by detractor pillar saline excess brawl alhambra blimp brinkmanship rout orange vice potbelly contagion .reach transom adventitious rheum chinese bigot ordinal parental youngster britannica antwerp prussia skeleton preference effete excretory auric helmsmen impost sloe ambrosia anastigmatic durrell contiguous bragg limbo inflate wylie hibbard rift checkpoint geneva partook blather bronzy ,brute bunt papua buss cuprous tawny emblem campion degas stage curb lombard redtop necessity macintosh wadi amoco .

