# mail/pod thread 404293b9f31f-amazing_rolex_replica | root tiarwemhjfgscegunzwhrmx@lycos.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2004-04-23T18:03:08Z | Aurelia Mccullough <klsvik@yahoo.com> | tiarwemhjfgscegunzwhrmx@lycos.com | mail/pod/cur/1082743388.404293b9f31ff887.jbomohi:2,S
Title: Welcome




Hi,

    

    Thank you for expressing interest in

    Genuine Replica Watches.
    

  

    We would like to take this moment

 to introduce to you, 

 our fine selection of

    Italian crafted Rolex Timepieces.

  

    You can view our large selection of Rolexes 

  (including Breitling, Tag Heuer, Cartier etc) at:

  

  www.namethewatch.info
  

  

  As we are the direct manufacturers, 

  you are assured of the lowest prices and highest quality 

    each and every time you purchase from us.

   

    You may also be interested to know that we have the following brands 

  available in our wide selection as well:


  


  
    
        
          Rolex 

        
          Carrier 

        
          Bvlgari 

        
          Frank Muller 

        
          Harry Winston 

        
          Chopard 

        
          Patek Philippe 

        
          Vacheron Constantin 

        
          Breguet 

        
          A.lange & Sohne 

        
          Glashute Original 

        
          Audemars Piguet 

        
          Roger Dubuis 

        
          Blancpain 

        
          Jaeger-lecoultre 

        
          IWC 

        
          Zenith 

        
          Officine Panerai 

        
          Alain Silberstein 

        
          Chronoswiss 

        
          Breitling 

        
          Omega 

        
          Tag Heuer 

        
          Ikepod 

        
          Eberhard 

        
          Tudor 

	    
          Sin 

        
  

If you see anything that might interest you, 

  or if you have any questions, please don't hesitate to check us out at:

    

www.namethewatch.info

I certainly look forward to hearing from you. 

  

  Best regards, 

  

  Mike

  

  Sales Manager 

  Genuine Replicas 

You aquired this email because your have previous purchased from, 

or inquired about our product line under GENUINE REPLICAS. 

If you prefer not to participate further with GENUINE REPLICAS,

proceed by sending an email with the title heading: 

DELETE in the subject line to unsubscribe@namethewatchinfo



I am the most unfortunate of men. Rich, respected, fairly well educated and of sound health

-- with many other advantages usually valued by those having them and coveted by those who 

have them not -- I sometimes think that I should be less unhappy if they had been denied me,

for then the contrast between my outer and my inner life would not be continually demanding 

a painful attention. In the stress of privation and the need of effort I might sometimes forget 

the sombre secret ever baffling the conjecture that it compels. 

  

  I am the only child of Joel and Julia Hetman. The one was a well-to-do country gentleman, the

  other a beautiful and accomplished woman to whom he was passionately attached with what I

  now know to have been a jealous and exacting devotion. The family home was a few miles from 

  Nashville, Tennessee, a large, irregularly built dwelling of no particular order of architecture, 

  a little way off the road, in a park of trees and shrubbery.

  

At the time of which I write I was nineteen years old, a student at Yale. One day a

telegram from my father of such urgency that in compliance with its unexplained demand I left 

at once for home. At the railway station in Nashville a distant relative awaited me to apprise me

of the reason for my recall: my mother had been barbarously murdered -- why and by whom none

could conjecture, but the circumstances were these. 



My father had gone to Nashville, intending to return the next afternoon. Something prevented his

accomplishing the business in hand, so he returned on the same night, arriving just before the dawn

 In his testimony before the coroner he explained that having no latchkey and not caring to disturb

the sleeping servants, he had, with no clearly defined intention, gone round to the rear of the house.

As he turned an angle of the building, he heard a sound as of a door gently closed, and saw in the darkness,

indistinctly, the figure of a man, which instantly disappeared among the trees of the lawn. A hasty 

pursuit and brief search of the grounds in the belief that the trespasser was some one visiting 

a servant proving fruitless, he entered at the unlocked door and mounted the stairs to my mother's chamber.

Its door was open, and stepping into black darkness he fell headlong over some heavy object on the floor.

I may spare myself the details; it was my poor mother, dead of strangulation by human hands! 

