# mail/pod thread 44f755376f1f-intractable,armm_our_newst0ck_pick_-greatnews | root qpu5d1-880836984649563940-4938793263490642@corundum7 | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2004-07-19T17:12:09Z | Charlene <maoxk@gala.net> | qpu5d1-880836984649563940-4938793263490642@corundum7 | mail/pod/cur/1090257129.44f755376f1f205d.jbomohi:2,S
Leonel Schaffer,

Breaking News for ARMM -  American Resource Management, Inc.


Efficiency Technologies, Inc.'s New Centrifugal Chiller Efficiency and Management Tool Can Help Save Industry Billions in Energy Costs 

ARMM launch new service (EffHVAC)

Dont miss this great investment issue! ARMM is another hot public traded company that is set to soar on Monday, July 19th.


BIG PR campaign starting on 19th of July for ARMM - Stock will explode - Just read the news - Millions of people will receive the positive news and PR information about ARMM during the weekend :)

---------------------
Price on Friday: $0.12
Next 3 days potential price: $0.55
Next 10 days potential price: $0.75
---------------------

Get on Board with ARMM and enjoy some incredible profits in the next 3-10 days!!

ALL TECHNICAL INDICATORS SAY - BUY ARMM @ up to 55 cents!

Significant short term trading profits in ARMM are being predicted, great news already issued by the company and big PR campaign on the way in the next few days.
 

COMPANY PROFILE
-------------->
American Resource Management, Inc., through its wholly-owned subsidiary, Efficiency Technologies, Inc. ("EffTec") is a Tulsa, Oklahoma based company dedicated to developing energy efficiency monitoring programs for commercial/industrial HVAC systems principally made up of centrifugal chillers and boilers.  Centrifugal chillers are the single largest energy-using components in most facilities and can typically consume more than 50% of the total electrical usage.  Centrifugal chillers running inefficiently result in substantially higher energy costs, decreased equipment reliability and shortened lifespan.


EffTec has developed a powerful, easy-to-use, online diagnostic service called EffHVAC that gives facilities the ability to document, monitor, evaluate and manage centrifugal chiller system performance.  EffHVAC created detailed reports that contain a wealth of information that can be used to improve operations and save thousands of dollars in utility costs.
 

EffTec offers comprehensive and flexible HVAC consulting and training.  Our team consists of industry-recognized experts in HVAC system design, efficiency, preventive and proactive maintenance, repair, chemistry, computer programming and marketing.  Combine EffHVAC with our consulting services and start developing a world-class HVAC program to improve your bottom line.  

   
____________
Information within this email contains "forward looking statements" within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21B of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Any statements that express or involve discussions with respect to predictions, goals, expectations, beliefs, plans, projections, objectives, assumptions or future events or performance are not statements of historical fact and may be "forward looking statements." All information provided within this email pertaining to investing, stocks, securities must be understood as information provided and not investment advice. We advise all readers and subscribers to seek advice from a registered professional securities representative before deciding to trade in stocks featured within this email. None of the material within this report shall be construed as any kind of investment advice. Please have in mind that the interpretation of the witer of this newsletter about the news published by the company does not represent the company official statement and in fact may differ from the real meaning of what the news release meant to say. Please read the news release by yourself and judge by yourself about the details in it.  We DO hold ARMM shares prior to the publication of this report. Be aware of an inherent conflict of interest resulting from such holdings due to our intent to profit from the liquidation of these shares. Our shares may be sold at any time, even after positive statements have been made regarding the above company. Readers of this publication are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which are based on certain assumptions and expectations involving various risks and uncertainties, that could cause results to differ materially from those set forth in the forward- looking statements. Please be advised that nothing within this email shall constitute a solicitation or an offer to buy or sell any security mentioned herein. This newsletter is neither a registered investment advisor nor affiliated with any broker or dealer.  This newsletter was paid $11500 from third party to send this report. PLEASE DO YOUR OWN DUE DILIGENCE BEFORE INVESTING IN ANY PROFILED COMPANY.


barefaced,sharpened hearing suddenly,barefaced,sharpened hearing suddenly,barefaced,sharpened hearing suddenly.barefaced,sharpened hearing suddenly,barefaced,sharpened hearing suddenly.
barefaced,sharpened hearing suddenly,barefaced,sharpened hearing suddenly,barefaced,sharpened hearing suddenly.barefaced,sharpened hearing suddenly,barefaced,sharpened hearing suddenly.
barefaced,sharpened hearing suddenly,barefaced,sharpened hearing suddenly,barefaced,sharpened hearing suddenly.barefaced,sharpened hearing suddenly,barefaced,sharpened hearing suddenly.

