# mail/pod thread 8364ac6725a6-chamomile,st0cktrader_news | root 37987115378.339723366082128020112@inbox.lv | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2004-09-02T06:07:30Z | Gerry Baird <gvobgcprngpwad@inbox.lv> | 37987115378.339723366082128020112@inbox.lv | mail/pod/cur/1094105250.8364ac6725a67656.jbomohi:2,S
Raquel Hinson,



  
    
      
        
        
          
            
            
            Introducing 'International Pharmacy Outlets Inc.'

            
            OTCBB: IPCY

            
            GET IN  "IPCY" NOW!  HUGE NEWS FOR "IPCY" after the closing bell on Wednesday

            
          
          
        
      
    
    
      
        
        
          
            
          
                    
                        

                            MicroCap 
            Marketing PLAY OF THE WEEK for our investors this week is 
            International Pharmacy Outlets Inc. (OTCBB: IPCY). 

                            If you tuned 
            in Monday you would have seen our last week PLAY OF THE WEEK,  EMTK 
            go from Fridays's close of $.10 to a high of .65 on Wednesday. 
            That's a 600% gain in just three days. 

                            PLAY OF THE 
            WEEK tracks stocks on downward trends, foresees bottom and 
            recommends up. 

                            SPECULATIVE TARGET PRICE IN 
            NEXT 3-5 DAYS: $0.24 - 0.29

            SPECULATIVE TARGET PRICE IN NEXT 20-30 DAYS: $0.39

 

                            International Pharmacy Outlets, Inc. is publicly traded holding company whose 
stock is traded over the counter under the trading symbol: IPCY. The company 
operates through its wholly owned subsidiaries, Caribbean Marketing Agencies, 
Ltd. (CMA) and AccessRX C.S. S.A. ( http://www.access-call-/ Center.com). CMA is 
a wholesale importer/exporter of prescription drugs and a marketing and 
advertising agency providing services to retail pharmacies and mail order 
centers located throughout the Caribbean that desire to sell prescription drugs 
to Caribbean tourists using the company's proprietary systems and turnkey 
marketing and customer support programs. AccessRx is a pharmaceutical customer 
service center operating a multi-lingual 24-hour call center for CMA's retail 
pharmacy and mail order pharmacy clients.

                            In July 2003, CMA entered into a five-year exclusive distributorship for 
selected countries in the Caribbean for Cipla Corporation ( 
http://www.cipla.com/ ), and the entire Caribbean for their affiliate, Nebumed. 
The exclusive agreement also includes duty free shops worldwide, cruise ships 
worldwide, native American Indian reservations and U.S. military bases. CMA 
sells to pharmaceutical distributors, retail pharmacies, medical centers, 
hospitals, and government agencies throughout the Caribbean. CMA also provides 
marketing and advertising services targeted to Caribbean tourists traveling on 
cruise ships or staying in Caribbean resort hotels. CMA also licenses Caribbean 
retail and mail order pharmacies to provide mail order fulfillment services to 
Caribbean tourists. AccessRx was acquired to provide turnkey customer service 
for CMA licensed pharmacy outlets carrying its wholesale pharmaceutical 
products.

                            Stock Summary

                            International Pharmacy Outlets, Inc., formerly Symphony Investments, Inc., 
changed names and changed management and control on September 14, 2003. The 
Controlling shareholders, IPO Holding Company, Inc., a Nevada Corporation, owns 
20 million shares of preferred stock. On September 14, 2003, the Company 
acquired 100% of the shares of Caribbean Marketing Agencies, Ltd. (CMA) for 20 
million restricted shares of common stock (restricted under SEC Rule 144). As of 
the current date, the company has 23,554,194 shares of common stock outstanding, 
listed on the pink sheets. 2,004,194 shares are free trading and in the float 
owned by approximately 934 shareholders. Eight International Pharmacy Outlets, 
Inc. directors were issued 100,000 restricted shares each for a total of 800,000 
restricted shares. IPCY now has an established team of officers and directors 
that provide a broad base of experience in the prescription drug industry, the 
medical industry, and the import/export industry (see Management). The Company 
sold 750,000 shares of restricted stock in a private placement offering for 
$135,000 and a third party simultaneously paid an additional $1.5 million cash 
to the seller for the AccessRx's Viagra customer list.

            

                            MicroCap Marketing PLAY OF THE WEEK. Our trademark is our 
            uncanny ability to spot stocks that have bottomed-out and anticipate 
            their rebound and upward trend. Most of the stocks we track rebound 
            and peak within just two days, giving investors opportunity to make 
            a few bucks back in such a highly volatile market.  
                    
          
            
          
          
            
            
            Certain statements contained in this 
            news release may be forward-looking statements within the meaning of 
            The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These 
            statements may be identified by such terms as expect", "believe", 
            "may", "will", "explode","move","undervalued" and "intend" or 
            similar terms. The information in the above statement could not be 
            100% accurate and the newsletter is not responsible for this. We are 
            NOT a registered investment advisor or a broker dealer. This is NOT 
            an offer to buy or sell securities. No recommendation that the 
            securities of the companies profiled should be purchased, sold or 
            held by individuals or entities that learn of the profiled 
            companies. This newsletter was paid $14300 in cash by third party to 
            publish this report. Investing in companies profiled is high-risk 
            and use of this information is for reading purposes  only.
            The owners of this newsletter own IPCY shares which they bought prior to this newsletter publishing. 
            If anyone decides to act as an investor, then it will be that 
            investor's sole risk. Investors are advised NOT to invest without 
            the proper advertisement from an attorney or a registered financial 
            broker. Do not rely solely on the information presented,do 
            additional independent research to form your own opinion and 
            decision regarding investing in the profiled companies. Be advised 
            that the purchase of such high-risk securities may result in the 
            loss of your entire investment. Void where prohibited. The owners of 
            this publication or their partners may already own free trading 
            shares in IPCY may immediately sell all or a portion of these shares 
            into the open market at or about the time this report is published. 
            Factual statements are made as of the date stated and are subject to 
            change without notice.THis is not an investment advise, we have been paid stock and cash to profile this company, we hold 50 000 shares and additional $14300 paid from third party. Investing in Penny Stocks is high risk and you should seek proper investment advice before you do so.
          
          
            
          
        
        
      
    
    




radical ruth accord vestal wordsworth immigrate assimilable schubert aegis rpm almanac ,eigenvector rico steep earnest osmosis jacobsen augusta practitioner carthage augusta combination fifty merit fireman one have erato arkansas camouflage desorption pollinate stab linoleum motley multiplet .response braun secondary diathesis cruickshank debit fivefold drip devote abstracter alma cursive calhoun contributor penetrate wholly crossbow marina sandal freddie vanity widowhood revulsion flour snack edge exchequer wilkes ,watchband circulate mathematic cubbyhole diffeomorphic storeroom tickle clammy embarrass aruba cern jacobian aviate confidante upside waterhouse archaism we chortle psycho either casualty humid errant denature passerby quadripartite ambitious cummings what depositary walden americium insulate ethnic brink .

