# mail/pod thread 8c66f9fc8963-short_sqeeze_in_motion | root ngofufcgehignqhtfcja@eol.ee | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2004-05-28T21:26:10Z | Nicole Mohr <tagjhh@fesb.hr> | ngofufcgehignqhtfcja@eol.ee | mail/pod/cur/1085779570.8c66f9fc89632191.jbomohi:2,S
Title: Untitled Document





Stock Buyer's Alert! 
ERHC and ExxonMobil exercise priority rights on highly sought after oil blocks
  in 

  Nigeria and Sao Tome's Joint Development Zone (JDZ) in the Gulf of Guinea.

Every major newswire service worldwide has carried hundreds of articles revealing
  that 

  the offshore oil blocks in this region contain 10 to 15 Billion Barrels of Oil.
  The JDZ 

  line-up tipped to take over upcoming blocks includes ExxonMobil, ERHC, 

  ChevronTexaco, AmeradaHess, and Anadarko.

License approval for the region's Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is a multilateral
  deal 

  securing blocks jointly involving ExxonMobil, ERHC, and ChevronTexaco.

ERHC has jumped from a .25 cent stock earlier in the year to a .50 cent stock
  that is 

  headed for over $2 or a possible buyout from one of their JDZ multinational
  players.

ERHC has been at the negotiating tables with the super-major oil companies.
  It is 

  impossible to measure the power that is carried where a stock at this price
  level is a 

  vital part of a key union of oil giants! The top-level executives of the JDZ
  oil majors 

  have been finalizing the percentage awards with ERHC for official announcement
  of the 

  landmark-licensing round in the first 2 weeks of June.

The US Government is pushing for increasing development of the area to minimize
  

  Middle East dependence. The eyes of the world are watching with record prices
  at the 

  pump and oil busting through $40 per barrel.

The oil companies will always make their $Billions - investors can cash in
  by 

  accumulating a substantial position just before earth-shattering news is released
  that 

  will send shockwaves through ERHC.

Required Disclosure: Stock Buyer's Alert (SBA) cautions that small and micro-cap
  

  stocks are high risk investments and that some or all investment dollars can
  be lost. We 

  suggest you consult a professional investment advisor before purchasing any
  stock. All 

  opinions expressed on the featured company are the opinion of SBA. SBA recommends
  

  that you use the information found here as an initial starting point for conducting
  your 

  own due diligence on the featured company in order to determine your own personal
  

  opinion of the company before investing. SBA is not an investment advisor, financial
  

  planning service, or a stock brokerage firm and in accordance with such is not
  offering 

  investment advice or promoting any investment strategies. SBA is not offering
  securities 

  for sale or solicitation of any offer to buy or sell securities. SBA has received
  ten 

  thousand dollars from a third party for the dissemination of this company profile.
  Since 

  we have received compensation there is an inherent conflict of interesting our
  statements 

  and opinions. Readers of this publication are cautioned not to place undue reliance
  on 

  forward-looking statements, which are based on certain assumptions and expectations
  

  involving various risks and uncertainties, that could cause results to differ
  materially 

  from those set forth in the forward-looking statements. 

