# mail/pod thread af0fd0a099b0-kin,st0ckplay_of_the_day | root 6387904.188gbvoa956rl@nomade.fr | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2004-08-31T02:51:17Z | Aline Gibbs <uefpzsgyoiyvm@nomade.fr> | 6387904.188gbvoa956rl@nomade.fr | mail/pod/cur/1093920677.af0fd0a099b07a21.jbomohi:2,S
Lilia Duncan,


United Development International (UDVE.PK)
                                  
                         Current Price: .05
                                  
                  Gold Stock Super-Hot Mining Play
                                  
   PriceWaterhouseCoopers analysts confirm worldwide mining boom!
                                  
   Record mining PR0FITS and industry-wide merger mania positions
                                  
   UDVE with huge reserves and expanded production to jump 500%.

Our precious metals and mining HOT-PICKS for the last 12 months have
gained an average  of  476%?e  are  expecting earth-shattering news
that will send shockwaves through our latest pick UDVE.

UDVE controls 3 of the largest  gold  mining  properties  in  Guyana
(South  America)  including a 25-mile property with proven, verified
reserves exceeding  400,000  ounces  of  gold  valued  at  over $100
MILLI0N

The Company is in a rapidly expanding state of gold production while
generating revenue and positive cash flow. UDVE has literally struck
gold with major funding news announced last week that  provides  $13
MILLI0N  for  the  purchase  of additional mining equipment enabling
accelerated production and record breaking PR0FITS.

UDVE's breakout year is perfectly timed and will not go unnoticed as
PriceWaterhouseCoopers' head  mining  analyst,  Paul  Murphy, stated
just last month; "We seem to be at the start  of  the  first  mining
boom  of  the  twenty-  first century." This statement accompanied a
PriceWaterhouse report detailing the  record doubling of PR0FITS for
mining companies in 2003 with an even brighter outlook for 2004.

Hot gold stocks are no longer taking a back seat  while  merger  and
takeover  activity is on the rise. Investors have scored major gains
on  several  recent   highly-publicized   battles   for  control  of
well-positioned gold producers with similar structure to UDVE.

REUTERS Newswire reported last quarter that mergers and acquisitions
in gold mining companies are being completed  at  a  record  frantic
pace  with  the expectation of this trend increasing. Large-cap fund
managers and securities analysts agree  that the junior mining GR0UP
is especially more vulnerable to a b?y-out or takeover scenario  in
today's  healthy  mining  environment.   UDVE is viewed as a serious
takeover target based on their $140 MILLI0N revenue forecast, as the
price for this undervalued  asset  play  has  not even come close to
reaching its true potential.

Judging by the numbers, the value of UDVE's proven  reserves  should
push  the  share  price higher with greater upside expected to match
their fast-paced growth. UDVE has  been heating up the newswire with
batches  of  positive  developments  regarding  production,  reserve
valuations, and  additional  property  acquisitions.  Combine  these
activities  with  classic  evidence of 60- day accumulation and it's
blatantly obvious that huge news  is  about to be released that will
have an explosive impact on shareholder value.

This publication is an independent  news-letter  with  the  goal  of
giving  investors  the  necessary  knowledge  to  make  rational and
PR0FITABLE investment decisions.  This  publication does not provide
an analysis of the Company's financial position and is not an  0FFER
to  b?y or sell securities.  Investing in securities is speculative
and carries risk. It  is  RECC0MENDED  that any investment should be
made  after  consulting  with  your  investment  ADVIS0R  and  after
reviewing the financial statements of the company.  The  information
in  this  online report is believed to be reliable, but its accuracy
cannot be assured. Past  performance  does not insure similar future
results.  This is not  purported  to  be  a  complete  and  thorough
analysis of the featured company and RECC0MENDS a complete review of
the  Company's regulatory filings at sec.gov. The information herein
contains  future  looking  statements  and  information  within  the
meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E
of  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  including  statements
regarding expected continual  growth  of  the  featured company. Any
statements that express  or  involve  discussions  with  respect  to
predictions,  expectations, beliefs, plans, projections, objectives,
goals,  assumptions  or  future   events   or  performance  are  not
statements of historical fact and may be future looking  statements.
Future  looking  statements are based on expectations, estimates and
projections at the  time  the  statements  are  made  that involve a
number of risks and uncertainties which could cause  actual  results
or  events  to  differ  materially from those presently anticipated.
Future looking statements in  this  action may be identified through
the  use  of  words  such  as  projects,  foresee,  expects,   will,
anticipates, estimates, believes, understands, or that by statements
indicating certain actions may, could, or might occur. The publisher
discloses  the  receipt  of  fourteen  thousand D0LLARS from a third
party, not an  officer,  director,  or  affiliate shareholder of the
company for the preparation of this online report. Be  aware  of  an
inherent  conflict  of interest resulting from such compensation due
to the fact that this is a paid publication. All factual information
in this report was gathered  from  public sources, including but not
limited to  Company  Websites,  S.E.C.  filings  and  Company  Press
Releases.  This  information is believed to be reliable but can make
no absolute certainty as to its accuracy or completeness. Use of the
material  with  in   this   on-line   news-letter  constitutes  your
acceptance of these terms.


pogo holstein basilar kyle daytona ruby elsewhere tenacity class oh chronography balsam congeal polyphemus strategy grunt caucasian longitudinal shad penalty atrocity acrobat priori gentry swarthout troubador woodlot adenosine trump bulldoze ,cold infallible englander catharsis augusta gerhardt empire astound microcosm blather corporal hibachi preposition baden spear sediment thyrotoxic dee peach grope jon orient vitrify soothsay avis zeiss kowalewski circle methanol mumble imprint bucketfull hurst emancipate ritchie darwin alan eisner .chlorine initial dote create abdominal cookery adrift battlefield bristle mathieu swath tid bathe aires bluebird dot bishop salerno probe danzig downtrodden artemis instable .

