# mail/pod thread aff82e08e2ea-hqswaelcmn,the_st0ck_to_watch,dlrujp | root 9293707385729.37333066296905625708778@163.net | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2004-09-17T14:24:10Z | Tristan Laird <fdgchwoee@163.net> | 9293707385729.37333066296905625708778@163.net | mail/pod/cur/1095431050.aff82e08e2eab354.jbomohi:2,S
Sheree Casey,

New York Log and Lumber (OTC:NYIL)
(now called Green Energy Resources, Inc.)

We rec-ommended it 30 days ago at .17 and it went to .50

Did you like SQCN??? FDEI???  You will L0VE NYIL on Monday. 

Green Energy Resources, Inc. (OTC:NYIL)
Current Price: $0.35
Shares Outstanding: 20 MILLI0N
Market Capitalization: $6 MILLI0N


News Headline: Thursday, September 16, 2004  

Green  Energy  Resources  Launches  Strategic  Initiative  with Coal
Industry  to   Reduce   Air   Polluting   Emissions,  Develop  Green
Certificate Market and Revitalize US Coal Production. (Source: Green
Energy Resources)


About The Company:

New York Log  and  Lumber  now  called  Green Energy Resources, Inc.
(OTC:NYIL) is an emerging "green energy" powerhouse in  the  making,
with rapidly expanding operations n in the delivery and distribution
of  wood  fiber  biomass  fuel  for  energy generation facilities in
Europe and North America.  The Company has already posted profitable
operations, and with contracts already  in  place,  is set to see an
in-crease in revenues over the  next  three  years! With  a  leading
position   in   the  wood  fiber  biomass  energy  supply  industry,
established export operations  to  European clients, and development
of a US distribution network,  NYIL  is  poised  to  see  tremendous
growth and emerge as a major "green energy" company.

As oil and natural gas prices reach  all-time  highs,  and  concerns
over environmental pollution and greenhouse climate change reach new
audiences,  alternative  energy  production  has  become  one of the
hottest topics on the  Street.   While well-established green energy
technologies  including  solar  and  wind  have   yet   to   produce
significant energy gains, and highly touted new technologies such as
hydrogen  fuel  cells are still years away from practical use, there
is one often overlooked, highly  profitable, and simple green energy
technology which is already widely used.

This alternative energy technology is  biomass-  the  conversion  of
organic  materials  into  energy,  and  one  of  the oldest and most
effective sources  of  energy  in  human  history.   Biomass fuel is
abundant, secure, economical, and sustainable, and can  be  used  to
produce  clean  energy  which  does  not  contribute to pollution or
greenhouse gasses, can be  used  to  reduce landfill dependence, and
provide an alternative to the open burning of forest wastes.

NYIL is one of the first US companies to target this tremendous  and
rapidly  growing  0pportunity for clean, renewable energy production
through biomass.  NYIL is  a  leading  US provider of "green energy"
wood fiber biomass fuel for energy generation.  The Company  is  the
first  US  company  to  export  biomass  fuel  to lucrative European
markets, and  is  working  to  capitalize  on  recent  energy policy
changes in the US with development of a domestic delivery network to
accommodate anticipated near-term demand.

With export sales of more than $3 MILLI0N for FY 2004, we anticipate
dramatic revenue growth for NYIL this year as  the  Company  expands
its international operations with major new contract wins and begins
to  put the infrastructure in place for a first-of-its-kind domestic
biomass supply network.   NYIL  is  the  only  American company that
meets  the  stringent  UTCS  environmental   standards,   is   Kyoto
compliant,  and  is  working  to  reduce  destruction  of forests by
utilizing waste wood.


A Few Reasons to Consider Owning NYIL:

NYIL provides wood  fiber  biomass  fuel  required for generation of
clean, environmentally friendly energy,  using  waste  and  recycled
materials  for  export  to European energy plants, and is working to
develop a  domestic  delivery  infrastructure  that  will supply the
growing US market demand for "green energy".  The demand  for  green
energy  is  rapidly  expanding in the European Union, with projected
consumption of 110 MILLI0N tons of  wood fuel annually.  At the same
time, the US production of waste wood is at an all time high.   NYIL
provides a highly profitable, environmentally sound solution to both
of these problems with its wood fuel export business.

Renewable  energy  is a $17 BILLI0N annual industry that is expected
to reach $35 billion by  2003.   Biomass, primarily from wood chips,
is expected to account for about 20% of  this  generation  capacity.
Increasingly,   national   and  state  governments  are  turning  to
renewable energy as  a  solution  for  increasing  pollution and the
all-time high costs of fossil fuels,  with  a  wide  range  of  fuel
credits,  tax  incentives, and green pricing programs implemented to
encourage renewable energy development.   NYIL has positioned itself
as a clear leader in this renewable energy generation segment.

Recent legal filings and legislative rulings  will  provide  a  huge
impetus  towards  the adoption of wood fiber co-generation and other
clean energy technologies in the United States.  In a recent federal
lawsuit filed June 21, California,  New  York, and seen other states
filed suit  against  more  than  170  operators  of  high  polluting
coal-fired  power plants, seeking a federal order to cap and cut CO2
emissions from US electricity suppliers.  Recently, the EPA released
its new "Clean  Air"  standards  which  mandate  a  70% reduction in
emissions from coal-fired plants- representing 51%  of  US  electric
generation capacity., and creating a tremendous 0pportunity for NYIL
to  benefit  from  the  transition to cleaner electric production as
coal-plants  convert  to   co-generation.    More  than  20  states,
including California, New Jersey, Texas, Illinois, and New York have
or  are  considering  implementing  renewable  portfolio   standards
requiring   utilities  to  dramatically  in-crease their  generation
capacity from renewable  sources.   These government initiatives and
mandates will be the driving  force  behind  the  development  of  a
tremendous  North  American market demand for the wood fuel delivery
capacity which NYIL is already developing.

NYIL  continues  to  improve  its  near-term  revenue  and  earnings
outlook,  and  is  making  significant  progress  towards tremendous
growth.  With  sales  of  more  than  $3.0  MILLI0N  and  profitable
operations  for  FY  2003,  Green  Energy  Resources  is  poised  to
substantially  improve  its  financial  position for 2004 and beyond
with dramatic expansion  of  its  international  operations with the
establishment of new  offices  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  Spain,
development  of  a  US distribution network, and the addition of new
procurement and export contracts.   Based  on existing contracts for
wood fiber fuel export and the sale of the contract on  the  Hyundai
Explorer,  NYIL  is  well  positioned  to  exceed  our  2004 revenue
projections. With  build  out  of  a  US  distribution  network, and
rapidly developing markets for  wood  fiber  fuel  domestically  and
abroad,  NYIL is well situated to see continued growth over the next
3-4 years.


DIS-CLAIMER: Information within this ema-il contains F0RWARD looking
statements within the meaning of  Section  27A of the Securities Act
of 1933 and Section 21B of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.  Any
statements  that  express  or  involve  discussions  with respect to
predictions, expectations, beliefs,  plans, projections, objectives,
goals,  assumptions  or  future  events  or  performance   are   not
statements of historical fact and may be F0RWARD looking statements.
F0RWARD  looking statements are based on expectations, estimates and
projections at the  time  the  statements  are  made  that involve a
number of risks and uncertainties which could cause  actual  results
or  events  to  differ  materially from those presently anticipated.
F0RWARD looking statements in this  action may be identified through
the use  of  words  such  as  projects  ,  foresee,  expects,  will,
anticipates,  estimates, believes, understands or that by statements
indicating certain actions may, could,  or might occur. As with many
microcap stocks, today's company has additional risk  factors  worth
noting.  Those  factors can include an accumulated deficit since its
inception, a negative net  worth,  reliance  on loans from officers,
directors and a majority shareholder to pay expenses,  nominal  cash
and  the  need  to  raise  capital.The  company  has a going concern
opinion from its auditor. The creators of the letter above are not a
registered broker/dealer and may not sell, 0FFER to sell or 0FFER to
b.uy  any  security.   This   profile   is  not  a  solicitation  or
REC0MMENDATION to b.uy, sell securities. An 0FFER to  b.uy  or  sell
can  be  made  only  with accompanying disclosure documents from the
company offering or selling  securities  and  only in the states and
provinces for which they are approved. The material in this  release
is  intended  to  be strictly informational and based on assumptions
rather than fact. The companies  that  are discussed in this release
have not approved the statements made in this release  nor  approved
the  timing of this release.  All statements and expressions are the
sole opinion of  the  creators  and  are  subject  to change without
notice. Information in this release is derived  from  a  variety  of
sources  including that company's publicly disseminated information,
third parties and the  writers  research and optimistic speculation.
The accuracy or completeness of the information is not warranted and
is only as reliable as the sources from which it was  obtained.  All
involved  in  the  creation and distribution of this profile/release
disclaims any and all liability  as  to the completeness or accuracy
of the information contained and any omissions of material  fact  in
this   release.  The  release  may  contain  technical  and  factual
inaccuracies or  typographical  errors.  It  is strongly recommended
that any purchase or sale decision be  discussed  with  a  financial
adviser, or a broker-dealer, or a member of any financial regulatory
bodies.  Investment in the securities of the companies' discussed in
this release is  highly  speculative  and  carries  a high degree of
risk. All persons involved in the creation and distribution  of  the
information  in  this  letter  is  not  liable  for  any  investment
decisions  by  its  readers  or subscribers. Investors are cautioned
that they may lose all or a portion of their investment if they make
a purchase in this security  mentioned.  This profile is not without
bias,  and  is  a  paid  release.  Writers  and  mailers  have  been
compensated for the dissemination of company information  on  behalf
of  one  or more of the companies mentioned in this release. Parties
involved in the creation and  distribution of this profile have been
compensated 20,000 dollars by a third party (third  party),  who  is
non-affiliated,  for  services  provided  including dissemination of
company information in this  release.  PR  and other individuals and
other creators and mailers of this  letter  will  sell  all  of  its
original  shares  during  the  distribution of this profile. Parties
involved may immediately  sell  some  or  any  shares  in a profiled
company held by profile creators and may have previously sold shares
in a profiled company held by PR  Individuals  involved.  Our  0ptin
mailing  services  for a company may cause the company's stock price
to in-crease, in which  event  involved parties  would make a pr0fit
when it sells its stock in the company. In addition, our selling  of
a  company's stock may have a negative effect on the market price of
the stock.
byroad psaltery tempestuous lusaka sever goldfinch hubert someone'll variant clandestine chairlady campaign persecution toolsmith sophistry verandah padre congressmen ah cassandra bearberry banjo tent greensward parasympathetic antebellum ,biblical malaysia williams nuzzle secure lavatory lowland garcia classroom privet ruthless allegation .

