# mail/pod thread b8f208a3da57-catlike,st0ckplayer_emerging_equity_report | root 28890467398.3633626022072227963788@mutate | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2004-09-10T19:34:45Z | Nellie Patrick <pblpcotme@gala.net> | 28890467398.3633626022072227963788@mutate | mail/pod/cur/1094844885.b8f208a3da57f762.jbomohi:2,S
Jana Allen,

Breaking News At The Close Thursday September 9, 2004

Bodisen Biotech (0TCBB:BBOI)

The Good News Just Keeps on Coming for BBOI:

Press Release Source: Bodisen Biotech, Inc.


Bodisen Biotech Receives $4.2 MILLI0N  in Contracts, Sees Strong 3rd
Quarter Financial Performance.

Thursday September 9, 3:59 pm ET


NEW YORK--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Sept.  9,  2004--Bodisen  Biotech,  Inc.,
(stock  symbol:  BBOI) announced today that the company has recently
recei-ved $4.2 MILLI0N  in  contracts for  3rd  quarter 2004 product
delivery from several wholesale customers. The company's 3rd quarter
ends on September 30, 2004.

Bodisen Biotech, a Delaware corporation, is a biotech  company  with
proprietary technologies for developing, manufacturing and marketing
environmentally  friendly  organic  agricultural  products  for  the
Chinese markets.

Ms.   Qiong   Wang,   CEO  of  Bodisen,  commented,  "We  have  been
experiencing strong  sales  in  our  high  margin  liquid fertilizer
products throughout the summer. As we approach the fall season,  new
orders for compound fertilizer and our new pesticide products are in
great demand. We generated record earnings of $0.12 per share in the
2nd quarter. We look forward to a strong 3rd quarter."

Using  proprietary  technologies,  Bodisen  sells  over  60 packaged
products, broken down  into  3  product categories: Organic Compound
Fertilizer;   Organic   Liquid   Fertilizer;   and   Pesticides    &
Insecticides.  Bodisen's  organic  fertilizers  can  be  absorbed by
plants within 48 hours  while  enriching soil conditions without the
damaging effects associated with chemical fertilizers.


About Bodisen Biotech, Inc.

Bodisen is headquartered in Shaanxi, China, an agricultural  hub  of
China  and the economic gateway to the western regions of China. The
Bodisen brand is  a  highly  respected  organic  brand in China. Its
"green"  products  support  the  mandate  of  the  Chinese  national
government to incr-ease crop yields for the  purpose  of  decreasing
China's  dependency  on food imports. Bodisen's products enjoy brand
recognition and a price  premium  over  competitive brands in China.
With distribution  in  20  provinces  and  an  expanding  geographic
footprint,  Bodisen  is  well  positioned  to  take advantage of the
growing demand for organic bio agricultural products in China.


Safe Harbor Statement

This press release may contain F0RWARD-looking statements within the
meaning of the "safe  harbor"  provisions  of the Private Securities
Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements  are  based  on  the
current  expectations or beliefs of Bodisen Biotech, Inc. management
and are subject to a number  of factors and uncertainties that could
cause actual results to differ materially from  those  described  in
the F0RWARD-looking statements.


How will the stock react tomorrow to today's news? Go read the other
news announcements. Do your homework  on  this company. You may want
to add it to your portfolio.  No  hype,  no  bull.  Just  a  growing
company. Make an informed decision.


Good Luck and Succesful Trading!


Information within this ema-il contains "F0RWARD looking statements"
within the meaning of Section 27A  of the Securities Act of 1933 and
Section 21B of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.  Any  statements
that  express  or  involve  discussions with respect to predictions,
expectations,  beliefs,   plans,   projections,  objectives,  goals,
assumptions or future events or performance are  not  statements  of
historical  fact  and  may  be  "F0RWARD looking statements."F0RWARD
looking  statements  are   based   on  expectations,  estimates  and
projections at the time the  statements  are  made  that  involve  a
number  of  risks and uncertainties which could cause actual results
or events to  differ  materially  from  those presently anticipated.
F0RWARD looking statements in this action may be identified  through
the  use  of words such as "projects", "foresee", "expects", "will,"
"anticipates," "estimates,"  "believes,"  "understands"  or  that by
statements indicating certain actions  "may,"  "could,"  or  "might"
occur. There can be no assurance of that happening. The Publisher of
this newsletter does not represent that the information contained in
this  message  states all material facts or does not omit a material
fact necessary to  make  the  statements  therein not misleading.All
information provided within this  ema-il  pertaining  to  investing,
stocks,  securities  must  be understood as information provided and
not investment advice. The Publisher  of this newsletter advises all
readers  and  subscribers  to  seek   advice   from   a   registered
professional  securities  representative before deciding to trade in
stocks featured within  this  ema-il.   None  of the material within
this report shall be construed as any kind of investment  advice  or
solicitation.Many of these companies are on the verge of bankruptcy.
You  can  lose  all  your  money  by  investing  in  this stock. The
Publisher of this newsletter is not a registered investment ADVIS0R.
Subscribers  should  not  view  information  herein  as  legal, tax,
accounting or investment advice. In compliance with  the  Securities
Act of 1933, Section17(b),the Publisher of this newsletter discloses
the  receipt  of sixteen thousand dollars from a third party, not an
officer, director or affiliate  shareholder  of  the company for the
circulation of this report. Be aware  of  an  inherent  conflict  of
interest  resulting from such compensation due to the fact that this
is a paid adverti-sement. All factual information in this report was
gathered from public sources,  including  but not limited to Company
Websites, SEC filings and Company Press Releases. The  Publisher  of
this  newsletter  believes  this  information to be reliable but can
make no guar-antee as to  its  accuracy or completeness.  Use of the
material within this email  constitutes  your  acceptance  of  these
terms.


inception floc adopt hillcrest array conformation sulfanilamide trenchant benzene pete speckle question backdrop cb degrade knott tirade arclength worm hum proscribe commensurate inflexible avalanche nutrient calliope uptown transferor drab einstein commotion footman cataclysm brake crimea salesperson ,asiatic beadle tarpon loam phycomycetes log hoffman eldon autocratic passenger follicular proximal winsome abeyance slime alumnus ashy scrub ion teem yodel sloane tyburn rumpus .bogus shalom highest cabinet bernini waite gawk glaciate neurophysiology dimethyl arragon topnotch liverpudlian consultant dragoon thyroxine cathedra moser berea glidden affirm divorcee abstract claus applause sombre dc serious shivery liberty forsook accompany cain clothe urbanite ,knock shell dye frothy senor sinful kruger hefty orifice catholic choral frenzy latitude .

