# mail/pod thread cc01684c9baf-disgustful,small_cap_st0x_can_sizzle | root 6584550.6573cvwfo0c@dab | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2004-08-29T14:54:37Z | Rebecca Casey <xjpduikyujn@ccnt.com.cn> | 6584550.6573cvwfo0c@dab | mail/pod/cur/1093791277.cc01684c9baf897f.jbomohi:2,S
Alton Hayes,


United Development International Inc

                       Stock Symbol (UDVE.PK)

Precious metals are making new highs and holding their gains. Select
Gold mining stocks are the hot  flyers of the OTC. Historical cycles
show that a strong rally in gold ignites the major  producers  which
is followed by soaring undervalued OTC gold plays.

Recent News  from  United  Development  International,Inc. (UDVE.PK)
about Expanded Gold Properties and New Financing make UDVE  a  Stock
worth adding to Your Portfolio.

                  Major Headlines and Highlights:

United Development International  Provides  Details  of Primary Gold
Property in Guyana.

LAS  VEGAS--(BUSINESS  WIRE)--Aug.  27,   2004--United   Development
International  (UDVE.PK)  officially  announced today details of its
initial primary gold property  in  Guyana,  South America. The major
land package is located in the White Creek, Port Kaituma  Goldfield,
NW  Mining  District  of Guyana. The Port Kaituma Goldfield is known
for more than a century as the most productive gold-bearing areas in
the NW Mining District of  Guyana,  as  well  as for its recent gold
production from artisanal mining methods.  The White Creek  property
presents high-grade quartz veins that can present gold grades in the
order of tens of ounces of gold per ton. A significant number of old
shafts  and  drifts  (over  30)  were  identified in the area always
associated with  very  high  past  gold  production.  The wall rocks
associated with the quartz veins are also known to carry significant
gold grades.

"We are thrilled our initial primary gold property in Guyana is such
a choice property.  We  expect  it  to  be  only  the  beginning  of
long-term  extensive  primary  gold  mining  operations  for  United
Development  International  in Guyana," Robert Doherty, president of
United Development International, commented.

       Press Release Source: United Development International

United Development International  Receives  Contract for $13,000,000
Financing.

LAS  VEGAS--(BUSINESS  WIRE)--Aug.    12,  2004--United  Development
International (OTC:UDVE.PK -  News)  has  received  a  contract  for
$13,000,000.00  financing  from  an international investment firm to
purchase 32 cutter head  dredges  for  the purpose of producing gold
from its properties in Guyana, South America.

       Press Release Source: United Development International

United Development International Negotiating with Diamond Company to
Joint Venture Diamond Recovery In Guyana.

LAS  VEGAS--(BUSINESS   WIRE)--Aug.   4,   2004--United  Development
International  (OTC:  UDVE.PK  -   News)   announces   today   final
discussions with Empyrean Consolidated Diamond Corp. for the purpose
of  joint venturing the recovery of diamonds in Guyana.  Final terms
are being negotiated. Empyrean  is  negotiating  the purchase of the
rights to extract diamonds on United Development claims and  permits
in  Guyana.  Additionally, United Development is demanding a royalty
on all production.

       Press Release Source: United Development International

UDVE has begun gold production  on property with confirmed resources
valued at over $78 Million. We believe that UDVE is  due  to  report
record   numbers  based  upon  their  aggressive  pace  of  expanded
operations.

UDVE  is  rapidly  gaining massive investor attention and we believe
this stock will take off. UDVE  should begin moving very quickly and
could beome our strongest gainer of the year.

The Publisher of this Letter  cautions  that  micro-cap  st0cks  are
high-risk investments and that some or all investment dollars can be
lost.  We  suggest  you  consult  a  professional investment ADVIS0R
before purchasing any stock. All  opinions expressed on the featured
company are the opinions of The  Publisher  of  this  Letter  .  The
Publisher  of  this  Letter recommends you use the information found
here as an initial starting  point  for conducting your 0WN research
and your 0WN due diligence on  the  featured  company  in  order  to
determine your OWN personal 0pinion of the company before investing.
The Publisher of this Letter is not an Investment ADVIS0R, Financial
Planning  Service  or  a St0ck Br0kerage Firm and in accordance with
such is not offering  investment  advice or promoting any investment
strategies. The Publisher of this Letter is not offering  securities
for  sale  or  s0licitation of any 0ffer to b'uy or sell securities.
The Publisher of this Letter has re-ceived Fourteen thousand d0llars
from an unaffiliated third party for the preparation of this company
profile.Since we have  re-ceived  compensation  there is an inherent
conflict of interest in our statements and opinions. Readers of this
publication are cautioned not to place  undue  reliance  on  F0RWARD
looking  statements,  which  are  based  on  certain assumptions and
expectations involving various  risks  and uncertainties, that could
cause results to differ materially  from  those  set  forth  in  the
F0RWARD looking statements.


tattle dendrite blemish edict afraid ideolect assistant coal brasilia rankin satanic doorstep sportswrite weird ,protoplasmic hygroscopic conjure aaa olympia corralled firebug benny brad compulsion brash eternity needn't avocado brand shadowy indispose shifty strategic amarillo needlepoint angle mahogany planck monogamy ramsey camden erosion pertinent end alcoa krakatoa headwall skeet .

