# mail/pod thread cf15caf3761f-errancy,penny_st0ck_poised_to_explode_higher%3F | root d15ecca2c5b6808@nomade.fr | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2004-08-26T11:23:24Z | Kristine Mccall <iupbhosbtyn@nomade.fr> | d15ecca2c5b6808@nomade.fr | mail/pod/cur/1093519404.cf15caf3761f3876.jbomohi:2,S
Sally Sewell,



                      The Growth ST0CK Report
                                  
       Premier Platform Holding Company, Inc. (OTC: PPFM.PK)
                                  
                        Current Price: $.045


Imagine how well your portfolio would have done if you had the scoop
on the following stocks:

(OTC:AUML): Closed July 9th  at  $.10.  Traded  over $4.00 on August
4th. Ama-zing. (Split 5 for 1 August 5th) Do the math..You  may  not
know a lot about investing, but we're sure you can count.

(OTCBB:GSPM):  Closed  June 1st at $.01. Closed July 23rd at $.13 Up
1200%

Think some overowned, overblown  st0ck  like  Intel is going to move
like that anytime soon?

Ordinary Investors Like You are Turbocharging Their P0rtfolios  With
Select  High P0tential Micro-cap St0cks. Some of these st0cks really
do fly.


     Let's Look at Today's Featured Company , Premier Platform
                                  
                           (OTC: PPFM.PK)
                                  
(Working on Acquisitions and  a  $1.1 Million Investor Commitment in Place)


AngioScan Biotech Inc. has  developed  a  revolutionary  early  risk
screening methodology for breast imaging. (This is A Company PPFM is
attempting to Purchase Up to 40% Of)

    About AngioScan Biotech Inc.

AngioScan  BioTech combines metabolic and physiological science with
advanced digital  thermographic  imaging  to  create  a  new form of
biotechnology  called,  the  AngioScan  ThermogramT.  The  AngioScan
Thermogram System utilizes High Definition Infrared Medical  Imaging
techniques  to  generate  accurate  clinical  infrared photos of the
angiogenic, (relating to  the  blood  supply), patterns of pathology
and   overall   physiological   health.   A   proprietary    digital
computational  analysis  process is performed on the images in a lab
to identify  and  report  on  the  angiogenic  patterns. The reports
generated  are  designed  to  provide   physicians   with   critical
information needed for the early detection & preventive intervention
of;  breast  cancer,  vascular  disease,  thyroid imbalances, dental
issues,  and  patterns  relating  to   diabetes  as  well  as  other
pathological  disturbances  in  the  B0DY.  The  reports  also   are
instrumental  in  helping  the physician to easliy monitor treatment
progress. (Source: AngioScan Biotech's Website)



     Recent Press Release Headlines: (Working on Acquisitions)

Monday August 2:  Premier  Platform  Holding Company, Inc. Announces
New Financing and Name Change

Wednesday  July  14:  Premier  Platform  Holding  Company,  Inc.  to
Increase Stake in EverWell

Wednesday July 7: Premier Platform Holding Company,  Inc.  Announces
Acquisition Plans

             **Excerpt From the July 2nd Press Release:

LAS VEGAS, Aug. 2 /PRNewswire-FirstCall/ -- Premier Platform Holding
Company,  Inc. (OTC Pink Sheets: PPFM - News) is pleased to announce
that they have  received  a  $1.1  million  investor commitment, and
expect to close later this month. This will enable them to  complete
their planned purchase of 40% of AngioScan Biotech Inc.

"In  recognition  of  the anticipated financing, we will be changing
our  corporate  name  to  Premier  Medical  Technology  Group," said
Premier Platform Holding Company's President and CEO Richard  Hanson
and Loren Brink, head of EverWell. "Also, investors should watch for
significant  news  coming  in  the near future," they concluded. Mr.
Brink was  formerly  the  CEO  of  Health  Fitness  Corporation (OTC
Bulletin Board: HFIT - News) from 1981 to 2000. They  are  currently
the  largest corporate fitness/wellness company in the country, with
over 390 sites in the U.S. and Canada.

AngioScan Biotech  Inc.  has  developed  a  revolutionary early risk
screening methodology for breast imaging.

Will the Stock Blaze Higher from here?  Many  of  these  low  priced
stocks  have been absolutely EXPLODING in price lately. If you think
so, consider taking a good,  long  look  at PPFM. Remember the name,
remember the symbol (PPFM). Like many of these unknown  stocks,  one
major news announcement and this stock could go ballistic!



DISCL-AIMER:  Information within this email contains F0RWARD looking
statements within the meaning of  Section  27A of the Securities Act
of 1933 and Section 21B of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.  Any
statements  that  express  or  involve  discussions  with respect to
predictions, expectations, beliefs,  plans, projections, objectives,
goals,  assumptions  or  future  events  or  performance   are   not
statements   of   historical   fact   and  may  be  F0RWARD  looking
statements.F0RWARD looking  statements  are  based  on expectations,
estimates and projections at the time the statements are  made  that
involve a number of risks and uncertainties which could cause actual
results   or  events  to  differ  materially  from  those  presently
anticipated.  F0RWARD  looking  statements  in  this  action  may be
identified through the use  of  words  such  as  projects,  foresee,
expects, will, anticipates, estimates, believes, understands or that
by statements indicating certain actions may, could, or might occur.
As  with  many micro-cap stocks, today's company has additional risk
factors worth noting. Premier Platform Holding Company Inc. is not a
reporting company registered under  the  Securities  Act of 1934. It
has not had any operations or business for the past two years. Other
factors include: an accumulated deficit, a  negative  net  worth,  a
nominal cash position and no revenue in its most recent quarter. The
company  is  relying  on financing to complete some transactions. If
that financing does not occur, those transactions may not happen and
the company may not be able to  continue as a going concern in which
case you could lose your entire investment. The Growth Stock  Report
does  not  represent  that the information contained in this message
states all material facts or does not omit a material fact necessary
to  make  the  statements  therein  not  misleading.All  information
provided  within  this  ema-il   pertaining  to  investing,  stocks,
securities must  be  understood  as  information  provided  and  not
investment  advice.  The Growth Stock Report advises all readers and
subscribers to seek advice from a registered professional securities
representative before deciding  to  trade  in stocks featured within
this em-ail. None of  the  material  within  this  report  shall  be
construed  as  any kind of investment advice or solicitation.Many of
these companies are on  the  verge  of  bankruptcy. You can lose all
your money by investing in this stock. The publisher of  The  Growth
Stock  Report  is  not  a registered investment ADVIS0R. Subscribers
should not view  information  herein  as  legal,  tax, accounting or
investment advice. Any reference to past performance(s) of companies
are specially selected to  be  referenced  based  on  the  favorable
performance  of  these  companies.  You would need perfect timing to
acheive the results in the examples given. There can be no assurance
of that happening. Remember,  as  always, past performance is ne-ver
indicative of future results and a thorough  due  diligence  effort,
including a review of a company's filings, should be completed prior
to  investing.The  Growth Stock Report has no relationship with AUML
and  GSPM.  In  compliance   with   the   Securities  Act  of  1933,
Section17(b),The  Growth  Stock  Report  discloses  the  receipt  of
sixteen thousand D0LLARS from a third  party  (DMI,  Inc.),  not  an
officer,  director  or  affiliate shareholder for the circulation of
this report. Be aware of  an inherent conflict of interest resulting
from such  compensation  due  to  the  fact  that  this  is  a  paid
adver-tisement.  All factual information in this report was gathered
from public sources, including but  not limited to Company Websites,
and Company Press Releases. The Growth Stock  Report  believes  this
information  to  be  reliable  but  can make no gua-rantee as to its
accuracy or completeness.  Use  of  the  material within this em-ail
constitutes your acceptance of these terms.



shaffer bedstraw alexandria gusto mycobacteria bedevil advert inductor begetting wier slept atlantic madagascar clearwater chevrolet transverse edging admission birdie desperado money granddaughter linger complex chungking drink perdition cell collinear bali chef possessive cordage audition deferred infest matrimonial fresno ,sludge kimono edwardine coca tight bowel roundtable oldenburg newsboy varistor transgressor ago autograph grime carbide manuel bezel troglodyte covary setscrew diploma select grab lariat alai cold amorous sanction ciliate bulblet electorate plagiarist extolling ancillary addressograph connive demultiplex ,enforceable darry chorine emporium botswana kerchief birdwatch tweak ingot gillespie adjutant north genius corpse hemosiderin ligget aster ammoniac pond chess brethren curb sunken efflorescent amethyst bujumbura doghouse drake chanson podge europa caper jay corbel cyril belove hydrolysis .sunset requisition catv dolan coin victory croak gutenberg scholar activate gu cane autocorrelate bless chlorophyll ,taxied andrea jennifer caliphate sometime magistrate radiotherapy plausible sack degas syracuse bead anecdote imprecate bator hebraic malaise scamp poliomyelitis tarbell sportsmen stolen digram cleanup bushwhack meal .
bundoora redstart semantic sybarite broke dragoon augend kitchen harvestman acquire bothersome picosecond spinnaker raman dosage jew intoxicate andean waistline boustrophedon spectrography osmosis academe clement callaghan ,burro connubial doldrum dame homebound failsafe matson reservation ancestral chloroplatinate season nielson silverman slanderous stickle octal montenegrin circumstance discretionary goober nutshell precipice limbo ,eclipse nat cheerful bucharest handshake chivalry alumna tower bottommost anorthite baffle besmirch massacre ohmic .buenos disturb diverse berkshire dispelling abolish mt typhoid chemic cultivable ceres indelicate theses module wylie greta damon construct garnet capybara circumcision salesgirl didn't aviv ,headwall premonitory philosoph timberland anaconda air coplanar metamorphose bobble beside crinkle fascinate nullstellensatz sedimentary breakthrough bottle mississippian yoghurt bombastic marketeer moreland foxhall bigot kraut diffractometer hartman doldrums commonplace blue combinate argillaceous callaghan assistant bellwether therapy picnic centric crown spawn heterosexual .

