# mail/pod thread dd866d0fbd32-donation_for_the_less_priveledged | root 20040605042500.60bbd2b2432@email.sirindia.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2004-06-05T18:37:44Z | mary jones <maryjones225@sirindia.com> | 20040605042500.60bbd2b2432@email.sirindia.com | mail/pod/cur/1086460664.dd866d0fbd320584.jbomohi:2,S
From: Mrs Mary Jones of Kuwait
RE: Donation for the less priveledged.


I am the above named person from Kuwait. I am married to Dr.Harry Jones who worked with Kuwait Embassy in Ivory Coast for nine years before he died in the year 2000.We were married for eleven years without a child. He died after a brief illness that lasted for only four days. Before his death we were both born again christians. Since his death I decided not to re-marry or get a child outside my matrimonial home which the Bible is again. When my late husband was alive he deposited the sum of $8.6 Million (Eight Million six hundred  thousand U.S.Dollars) with a finance/security company in Europe. Presently, this money is still with the Security Company and the management just wrote me as the beneficiary to come forward to receive the trunk box of money or rather issue a letter of authorisation to somebody to receive it on my behalf if I can not come over.


Presently, I'm in a hospital where I have been undergoing  treatment for oesophageal cancer. I have since lost my ability to talk and my doctors have told me that I have  only a few weeks to live. It is my last wish to see this money distributed to victims of this fire outbreak in  Australia and other charity organizations. Because relatives and friends have plundered so much of my  wealth since my  illness, I cannot live with the agony of entrusting this huge responsibility to any of them. Please,I beg you in the name of God to help me collect the deposit and the interest accrued from the company  and distribute it accordingly.


I want a person that is God fearing that will use  this money to fund churches,orphanages and widows propagating the word of God and to ensure that the  house of God is maintained. The Bible made us to understand that Blessed is the hand that giveth. I took this decision because I don't have any child that will inherit this money and my husband relatives are not Christians and I don't want my husband's hard  earned money to be misused by unbelievers. I don't  want a situation where this money will be used in  an ungodly manner.
Hence the reason for taking this bold decision. I am not afraid of death hence I know where I am going. 


I know that I am going to be in the bosom of the Lord. Exodus 14 VS 14 says that the lord will fight my case and I shall hold my peace. I don't need any telephone communication in this regard because of my soundless voice and presence of my husband's relatives around me always. I don't want them to know about this development. With God all things are possible. As soon as I receive your reply I shall give you the contact of the Finance/ Security Company in Europe. I will also issue  you a letter of authority that will prove you as the new beneficiary of this fund. I want you and the  church to always pray for me because the lord is my shephard.


My happiness is that I lived a life of a worthy Christian. however that wants to serve the Lord must serve him in spirit and truth. Please always be prayerful all through your life. Any delay in your reply will give me room in sourcing for another person for this same purpose.
Please assure me that you will act accordingly as I  stated herein.


Hoping to hearing from you soon. 
maryjones1810@yahoo.co.uk


 
For the best e-mail solution visit: www.sirindia.com

