# mail/pod thread e687487223ac-no_subject | root fuaolqgdvdciaaiqtbjcufuxn@rediff.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2004-02-19T05:35:13Z | Clark and Sandra <Brown.Karen946@rediff.com> | fuaolqgdvdciaaiqtbjcufuxn@rediff.com | mail/pod/cur/1077168913.e687487223ac421d.jbomohi:2,S
Title: coma intermit macroscopic orchard sinus barrage holman dress alliterate priory coddle simplicial ahmadabad weave candelabra gin gretchen benefactor congolese sheraton apathy ghent ink analogy waite exception grease along dismissal allure 
  
 Thanks to you and Bob for referring you to us:)

 While we do offer very competitive and low rates, I will tell you personally the number one reason why I and most people I've worked with like TermQuotes is more so for TermQuotes' honesty and trust-- two things gravely lacking with most life insurance provider.

 It is my hope that we can go over your needs and match you with an insurance package that serves your needs best.

 To get started, please fill out this short information form on our website by clicking here. 
Once you have done that, you will be contacted by TermQuote representatives with what we have to offer relative to what you tell us about your needs in the form you filled out.

 Sincerely,

 Clark and Sandra
 Account Executive
 TermQuotes Life Insurance
  
 Click here if you do not wish to hear from me again. Thank you.

    . ---Original Message---   To: Clark and Sandra  
 Sent: Sunday, February, 15, 2004  11:11 PM
 Subject: Life insurance quote
 
 Clark and Sandra,

 Bob has suggested to contact you in hopes of locking up a satisfying life insurance package. Hearing the reputation you guys at TermQuotes hold, I would sincerely appreciate if you could get back to me on how to proceed. I am very interested in seeing the kind of rates TermQuotes has to offer.

 If you could get me how I could go about receiving a formal quote, please let me know.

 Thanks,  
        edwardian charley diacritical forcible cruickshank dagger villein santayana heterogeneity mange mt attainder wavelet ed inefficacy scripture bonnie demit basil softwood percolate barrage jo iranian marcel 

