# mail/pod thread efcc1b9c60d4-our_predictions_make_investors_huge_money | root cghlaaefnjcbmenolpclgpeopaab.maryrivers_my@email.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2004-03-03T23:48:59Z | Mary Rivers <maryrivers_my@email.com> | cghlaaefnjcbmenolpclgpeopaab.maryrivers_my@email.com | mail/pod/cur/1078357739.efcc1b9c60d43a0b.jbomohi:2,S
  
    Gotham 
      City Times Newletter

      ALERT: 
      Strong Buy 9.5/10 
       Issued on CWTD 

	 

    
       
        CHINA 
          WORLD TRADE CORP. 

          Symbol: CWTD OTC.BB

          Price $4.10

          Shares out:  16Million

          Market Capitalization: $ 19Million

          Significant Revenue Growth in 2004

          Average 
          PE Industry: 30x

          Rating: Strong Buy 9.5/10

          7 days trading target:  $6.50

          30 day trading target:  $8.50 !
        CWTD 
            is up over 325% and rising!! Went as high as 750% last week! We profiled 
            this company last week at 1.10 . The company has just made application 
            to list on AMEX. This company is HOT and within 3 days of our 
            report the stock has went as high as 9.50! It's not too 
            late to get in on the action!!  
            

      
    
    *Mega 
      Trade Alert*

      
      *Read 
	Below For BREAKING 
      NEWS*

       
      China World Trade Corp 
      Makes Application to List  
       
      on AMEX

	 
	http://biz.yahoo.com/iw/040302/063931.html

		
    
       
        CWTD 
            is our  PLAY OF THE MONTH stock pick. 

           Here 
            are a few simple reasons why one would own China World Trade Corp: 
            

           China 
            World Trade Corporation is an official operator of World Trade Centers 
            in  China, 
            in association with The World Trade Centers Association (WTCA) and 
            offers an enormous variety of services for businesses and industries 
            seeking to do business in  China. 
            

           The 
            Company's business model consists of three major components -- The 
            World Trade Center business, value-added services, and strategic investments. 
             

           China 
            World Trade Corporation established the first World 
            Trade Center 
            in the  province of Guangzhou 
            (Canton) in the year 2002 
            and started the commercial operation at the beginning of 2003. This 
            significant event was covered in detail on 
            CNN ASIA. 

           With 
            the recent tragic events of 9-11, the name World 
            Trade Center 
            has instant global recognition, and stands for unity, strength and 
            prosperity throughout the worlds top economy leaders.

           CWTD's 
            business potential is built upon the opportunity created by the international 
            trade of China. 
            

          CWTD has just made the application to 
            list on the AMEX!!

        Investment 
            Outlook

          - CWTD HAS A STRONG MANAGEMENT TEAM THAT INCLUDES 
            TOP LOCAL CORPORATE OFFICERS, HIGH RANKING SENIOR GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS 
            AND SENIOR MANAGEMENT FROM THE HONG KONG WORLD TRADE CENTER

          - IN THE LAST TWENTY YEARS, THE FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT 
            INTO CHINA HAS INCREASED FROM 0.92 BILLION USD IN 1983 TO 52.74 BILLION 
            USD IN 2004 

          - CWTD IS FIRMLY POSITIONED TO VASTLY EXPAND ITS MARKETING 
            AND ACQUISITION STRATEGIES AND CAPITALIZE ON ASIA'S MULTI-BILLION 
            DOLLAR EMERGING MARKET. 

          -CWTD HAS JUST MADE THE APPLICATION TO LIST ON THE 
            AMEX!!! 

           

           

           

           

           

          
      
    
    
  




	
	


Disclaimer: 

 
The writers, PR firm, mailers involved in the creation, and 
distribution of the information above are not a registered broker/dealer and may 
not sell, offer to sell or offer to buy any security.  This profile is not a 
solicitation or recommendation to buy, sell securities. An offer to buy or sell 
can be made only with accompanying disclosure documents from the company 
offering or selling securities and only in the states and provinces for which 
they are approved. The material in this release is intended to be strictly 
informational and based on assumptions rather than fact. The companies that are 
discussed in this release have not approved the statements made in this release 
nor approved the timing of this release.  All statements and expressions are the 
sole opinion of the creators and are subject to change without notice. 
Information in this release is derived from a variety of sources including that 
company?s publicly disseminated information, third parties and the writer?s 
research and optimistic speculation. The accuracy or completeness of the 
information is not warranted and is only as reliable as the sources from which 
it was obtained. All involved in the creation and distribution of this 
profile/release disclaims any and all liability as to the completeness or 
accuracy of the information contained and any omissions of material fact in this 
release. The release may contain technical and factual inaccuracies or 
typographical errors. It is strongly recommended that any purchase or sale 
decision be discussed with a financial adviser, or a broker-dealer, or a member 
of any financial regulatory bodies. Investment in the securities of the 
companies? discussed in this release is highly speculative and carries a high 
degree of risk. All persons involved in the creation and distribution of the 
information in this letter is not liable for any investment decisions by its 
readers or subscribers. Investors are cautioned that they may lose all or a 
portion of their investment if they make a purchase in this security mentioned.

This profile is not without bias, and is a paid release. 
Writers and mailers have been compensated for the dissemination of company 
information on behalf of one or more of the companies mentioned in this release. 
Parties involved in the creation and distribution of this profile  have been 
compensated 50,000 shares  by a third party (third party), who is 
non-affiliated, for services provided including dissemination of company 
information in this release. PR and other individuals and other creators and 
mailers of this letter will sell all of its original shares during the 
distribution of this profile. Parties involved may immediately sell some or any 
shares in a profiled company held by profile creators and may have previously 
sold shares in a profiled company held by PR Individuals involved. Our Optin 
mailing services for a company may cause the company?s stock price to increase, 
in which event involved parties would make a profit when it sells its stock in 
the company. In addition, our selling of a company?s stock may have a negative 
effect on the market price of the stock. 

This release contains "forward-looking statements" within 
the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and 
Section 21E the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended and such 
forward-looking statements are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of 
the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. "Forward-looking 
statements" describe future expectations, plans, results, or strategies and are 
generally preceded by words such as ?may?, "future", "plan" or "planned", "will" 
or "should", "expected," "anticipates", "draft", "eventually" or "projected". 
You are cautioned that such statements are subject to a multitude of risks and 
uncertainties.


 

If you 
would like to be removed please cut and past the link below in your browser 
window  

http://ysdhw.wickyboo.info/iw/delink.php

 

cxicl kfywqhfmfx ezfxn udctz hllir 
sokym uailc puhbz vioun pmhzb tctjfsvisl cttnp xpjjz vxtop yrygn kyjjk uniln oyouy

