# mail/lojban-list thread 828b5e9be70c-emerald_tablet | root lpbblnnhbogbgainbiefaehfccaa.raganok@intrex.net | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2001-07-15T22:11:01Z | Craig <ragnarok@pobox.com> | lpbblnnhbogbgainbiefaehfccaa.raganok@intrex.net | mail/lojban-list/cur/995235061.828b5e9be70c0902.jbomohi:2,S
coi
I'm back working on the emerald tablet, having overcome the problems I was
facing with 'thus was the world created' (what creates it?) and 'the force
or power thereof is entire' (power of what?). What do you think of this?
It's nothing like a final draft, but I want to know what I need to change.

jetnu .i na jitfa .i raijetnu .i le cnita mintu le gapru gi'e le gapru mintu
le cnita .i go'i prupla lenu gasnu le pa dacni fasnu.ue .i ro datci ra'i le
pa .ije go'i bai lenu pruci le pa .i le solri patfu .i le lunra mamta .i le
brife befbevri .i le terdi kurji .i le seldrapaftu mintu ti .i ganai binxo
le dertu gi vlipa .i le dertu le fagri sepli ko .i le xutla le rufsu sepli
ko .i go'i bai lenu ko pajni .i se lafti le terdi fa'a le tsani .i farlu le
terdi .i cpacu le te vlipa .i le se go'i goi ko'e cnita .i ko'e gapru .i
pu'e ti do cpacu lenu zi'o sinma do .ije le cpifu cliva ko .i le ko'a te
vlipa cu zmadu ro le te vlipu bai lenu go'o .i jinga ro le xutla .i pagre ro
le sligu .i pu'e dei finti fe le terdi .ije lenu cenba cu zasti pu'e dei
.ije mi'e la xermes.trismsgistus. bai lenu mi ponse le ci pagbu po'e le
terdi sel krici .i lenu mi cusku le solri sel zukte cu se fanmo .uo

The original text from Isaac Newton:
Tis true without lying, certain & most true. That wch is below is like that
wch is above & that wch is above is like yt wch is below to do ye miracles
of one only thing. And as all things have been & arose from one by ye
mediation of one: so all things have their birth from this one thing by
adaptation. The Sun is its father, the moon its mother, the wind hath
carried it in its belly, the earth its nourse. The father of all perfection
in ye whole world is here. Its force or power is entire if it be converted
into earth. Seperate thou ye earth from ye fire, ye subtile from the gross
sweetly wth great indoustry. It ascends from ye earth to ye heaven & again
it desends to ye earth and receives ye force of things superior & inferior.
By this means you shall have ye glory of ye whole world & thereby all
obscurity shall fly from you. Its force is above all force. ffor it
vanquishes every subtile thing & penetrates every solid thing. So was ye
world created. From this are & do come admirable adaptaions whereof ye means
(Or process) is here in this. Hence I am called Hermes Trismegist, having
the three parts of ye philosophy of ye whole world. That wch I have said of
ye operation of ye Sun is accomplished & ended.

The original text from John French:
True, without all falsity, certain and most true. That which is inferior is
as that which is superior, and that which is superior is as that which is
inferior, for the accomplishing of the miracles of one thing. And as all
things were from one, by the mediation of one, so all things have proceeded
from this one thing by adaptation. The Father thereof is the sun, and the
Mother thereof the moon. The wind carried it in its belly. The nurse thereof
is the earth. The father of all the perfection of the whole world is this.
The virtue thereof is entire, if it be turned into earth. Thou shalt
separate the earth from the fire, the subtle from the thick, sweetly, with a
great deal of judgment. It ascends from the earth up to heaven, and again
descends down to the earth, and receives the powers of superiors and
inferiors. So you have the glory of the whole world. Therefore let all
obscurity fly from you. This is the strong fortitude of the whole fortitude,
because it shall overcome everything that is subtle and penetrate every
solid thing, as the world is created. Hence shall wonderful adaptations be,
whereof this is the manner, wherefore I am called Hermes Trismegistus,
having three parts of the philosophy of the whole world. It is complete,
what I have spoken of the operation of the sun.

                             --la kreig.daniyl

     'segu le bavli temci gi mi'o ba renvi lo purci
     .i ga le fonxa cu janbe gi du mi'
                     -la djimis.BYFet

xy.sy. gubmau ckiku cmesanji:  0x5C3A1E74


           


