# mail/lojban-list thread caeb59fb224e-a_serious_but_ungeneralized_new_attempt_on_q-ka | root lpbbjkmninkhacndiigmmefeekaa.a.rosta@ntlworld.com | 2 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2001-08-31T00:47:46Z | And Rosta <a.rosta@ntlworld.com> | lpbbjkmninkhacndiigmmefeekaa.a.rosta@ntlworld.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/999218866.caeb59fb224eef21.jbomohi:2,S
Okay, here's the context, as a reminder.

In English there's a construction normally called 'interrogative',
but this term is a bit misleading, because it has to do with
questions only in the prototypical case, not in all cases, so
I'll rename it 'interrogativoid'.

It remains a matter of dispute whether there is a semantic
unity to the grammatically-defined class of interrogativoids.
I intuit that there is a unity, but I definitely don't know
what it is.

For the prototypical interrogativoids that have to do with
indirect questions, it was decided to render these in Lojban
using Q-kau.

Then Q-kau was extended to render in Lojban all English
interrogativoids.

Then Jorge came up with a general characterization of the
meaning of Q-kau. This meant that Q-kau could be meaningfully 
extended to new grammatical contexts such as main bridi.

However, Jorge's general characterization was notional rather
than logically explicit, and until we have a logically explicit
characterization of Q-kau, we are building on quicksand.

So we still have the goal of finding a logically explicit 
characterization of Q-kau. This has to proceed on a case-by-case
basis, treating separately the genuinely interrogative-like
cases and the heterogenous non-interrogative-like cases. Once
we've done that, we'll have the full logical picture, and will
be able to see whether we can formally define Q-kau, or whether
Q-kau is the wrong thing for the job, and so on.

So now what follows is a new start at attempting to render in logically
explicit form the meaning of an interrogative-like case (with 'know')
and the meaning of a non-interrogative-like case (with 'change').
For future reference, I name the analysis:

The Extension-ce'u approach (Version 1)

1.
fadni jboselsku: 
ko'a djuno lodu'u ma kau prami ma kau
"She knows who loves who"

in explicit form:

(ro) de da poi ke'a ge jetnu gi du'u de -is-extension-of lodu'u 
   ce'u prami ce'u zo'u ko'a djuno da

The 'extension' of X is the set of all ordered n-tuples of values
such that when they bind the ce'u variables, the bridi to which the
ce'u belong becomes true.

2.
fadni jboselsku: 
??lodu'u makau fonxyjudri cu cenba (be lodu'u ce'u jetnu??)
(NOT "le fonxyjudri be mi cenba")
"My phonenumber has changed"

in explicit form:

de da poi ke'a du'u de -is-extension-of lodu'u ce'u fonxyjudri be
   mi zo'u da jetnybinxo [= change-from-false-to-true]

3.
fadni jboselsku: 
ko'a fo'e frica lodu'u ce'u prami ma kau
"Ko'a and Fo'e differ in who they love"

in explicit form:

no da poi de zo'u ke'a -is-extension-of lodu'u de prami ce'u zo'u
na ku ge ko'a gi fo'a me de

[Not all that good, that rendition; brain is dying.]

4.
"What I have for dinner depends on what's in the fridge"
"What shirt I wear depends on where I'm going"
fadni jboselsku: 
??lodu'u mi crekydasni ma kau cenba ??lodu'u ce'u jetnu kei fo
  lo??nu mi klama ma kau

-- I'm too tired to attempt this very difficult one.

--And.

           



=== 2 | 2001-08-31T15:55:39Z | pycyn@aol.com | 84.1aa1c204.28c10d7b@aol.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/999273339.a2d11c00660a4227.jbomohi:2,S
In a message dated 8/30/2001 8:44:31 PM Central Daylight Time, 
a.rosta@ntlworld.com writes:


> "What I have for dinner depends on what's in the fridge"
> "What shirt I wear depends on where I'm going"
> 

I am not sure I understand, so much less agree with, the "explicit", or even 
the normal, versions in this list.  But I want to focus on this last case, 
since it is pretty clearly ambiguous and I want to see whether I have sorted 
things out aright.
First there is a general claim about how meal planning is do, more or less.  
I'll get back to that.  The second is about what for dinner today or what 
shirt I will wear today.  In that case, it seems clear that it le meal/shirt 
depends on loi fridge content/le weather, with no indirect question games at 
all.  However, the indirect question form turns up again behind this 
dependency, as a general rule that now gets applied.  So, in one sense, the 
relative clause versions turn out to be instantiations of the indirect 
question versions.  And that looks right: if the indirect question version 
involves a set of propositions (or whatevers -- see the extensions to at 
least {ka}) then the relative clause version brings the {makau} down to a 
single particular answer. 
So back to the indirect question version.  Each indirect question is a set of 
answers, propositions that match the paradigm forms in meaning even if not in 
form.  What then of "depends on"?  It appears to mean a selection of 
conditional sentences taking (at least) a subset of the crossproduct of the 
two sets  -- but quite a bit more, I think.  "Depends  on" says that there is 
an satisfied subset of this sort, such that if P is "What's in the fridge" 
set and Q is in the "What's for dinner" set then "If P the Q" may be in the 
set that makes up the dependency  -- and will be if it is non-vacuously true. 
 It is important to note that the connection here is "depends on", not "is 
determined by", so other factors may enter in -- what I had for lunch, what 
our guest cannot eat,...., and also does not require that what we eat be from 
what is in the fridge (if the answer about content is "Nothing," then the 
answer about dinner may be "canned beans" or "take-out" or "eat out" or...., 
as indeed it may always be if the contents don't suit).  
This leaves the question of how to say this.  The gismu list is not very 
suggestive of where to start.  Working with the way things change, which I 
thought a good idea a couple of weeks ago, now seems less advantageous than 
trying to tackle the issue head-on.  The changes are in loi content and le 
meal, not in the general associations (though I suppose that the associations 
change some. too -- I may not go for dragon and phoenix every time I have the 
ingredients, even though the former drawbacks no longer apply -- like I just 
had it for lunch or yesterday's dinner).
           
