# mail/lojban-list thread ee50c4ea7c67-how_grammar_is_learned | root pine.lnx.4.33.0108261530500.2670-100000@xena.cft.ca.us | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2001-08-26T23:17:44Z | Jim Carter <jimc@MATH.UCLA.EDU> | pine.lnx.4.33.0108261530500.2670-100000@xena.cft.ca.us | mail/lojban-list/cur/998867864.ee50c4ea7c678acf.jbomohi:2,S
Oops, I was overactive with the "D" key due to the high list traffic, so I
lost who I'm replying to, but I think it was Craig.  The issue was
anecdotes about how he feels he learns language.  Here's a theoretical
article that bears on the point.

Prince, Alan, and Paul Smolensky, "Optimality: From Neural Networks to
Universal Grammar", Science, vol 275 page 1604 (14 March 1997).

jimc's summary:  Chomsky proposed that language behavior be studied in
connection with grammar (semantics being recognized but left for later).
A grammar in Chomsky's sense is a specification in such a form (such as
BNF) that all valid sentences could potentially be generated from it.  In
the present article a different approach is taken.  Grammar rules are
stated as a set of constraints (such as, people like the subject first, or
people don't like adjacent consonants).  The valid sentences are the ones
that optimally satisfy those constraints.  (Phonology and syntax are merged
in this analysis.) The kinds of judgments actually made about sentences
are a subset of the judgments that could be made, so that it appears that
the capacity to include certain judgments among the grammatical rules is
hardwired in the brain. (No quantitative data on this point, but presumably
it's in the references.)

The optimization is also a special case: strict hierarchy.  Thus a sentence
that fails a more important rule gets a bad score that cannot be redeemed
by less important good features.  However, the ranking order of the various
feature judgments differs from one language to the next, and many features
are considered irrelevant in one language even though they have high
ranking in another.  Example, Chinese words absolutely cannot end in a
consonant (counting r, n, ng as vowels), while English has no compunction
about that.

There is a pre-existing theory called the "theory of harmony" very similar
to the above, saying that the valid sentences are those most in harmony
with a list of grammatical rules.  A neural net is well adapted to
implement a harmony grammar.

In the Chomskyan view, substantially different programs are needed to
generate output and to parse input, and the grammar has to be coordinated
between them. If neural nets are used, consider the "deep" vs. "surface"
structure (meaning vs. language).  To generate a sentence, fix the deep
structure signals and read out the surface structure which "means" what you
keyed in.  To parse, fix the surface structure signals on the same net and
read out the deep structure.

Young children can parse more complex sentences than they can correctly
generate.  Of course their neural net weights have not converged to the
adult values.  When a valid (adult) sentence is keyed into the net's
surface states, it avoids violating many constraints, and thus more subtle
details of the sentence (such as semantics) govern what state the deep
structure assumes.  On the other hand, if the same deep structure were
keyed in for generation, many of the potential outputs would violate
important rules due to the flaky weights, and the optimal output would be
both simple (less potential violations) and of low fidelity compared to
what an adult could produce.  It is hard to understand the in-out mismatch
using a Chomskyan grammar theory.  [end]


For more on this business of "keying in" input or output state vectors,
see:

Hinton, Geoffrey E, Peter Dayan, Brendan J. Frey, Radford M. Neal, "The
Wake-Sleep Algorithm for Unsupervised Neural Networks", Science, vol 268
(26 May 1995), p. 1158.

Their experiment used U.S. Postal Service "CEDAR" handwritten digit
samples at 8x8 pixels.  The neural net had 4 layers kind of in duplicate,
such that the state of each "neuron" in a downstream layer was a function
of those upstream, but there were also connections from the downstream
neuron back to a "shadow copy" of the upstream neurons.  Connection weights
were initially random.

During the "wake" phase, the in->out connections produced whatever
downstream patterns they wanted, and the out<-in connections were adjusted
so the shadow copies matched the authentic upstream neurons as closely as
possible; in particular, the shadow net was rewarded if it could reproduce
the authentic digit patterns it was seeing.  During the "sleep"  or "dream"
phase the main net was gated off, outputs (digit choices, 4 bits) were
activated one pattern at a time, the shadow net reproduced what it could,
and the in->out connections (with input from the shadow neurons) were
adjusted so as to reproduce as closely as possible the imposed outputs or
the resulting inter-layer levels.

This process converged so that most 0's activated one output pattern (4
bits, binary coded decimal), most 1's activated another, and so on.
Training consisted of 500 repetitions of 7000 different pictures.
Afterward, novel pictures were presented and 4.8% of them were classified
correctly.  This was better than competing algorithms which require human
judgments in the training process.

Machines dreaming of zipcodes (Post Codes for you Brits) seem surreal, but
the form of the neural net used matches what is needed to encode and decode
language according to the model of the first paper.  However, the net
tested here had four layers of 64, 16, 16, 4 neurons.  I expect it would
take a lot more than that to handle language.

James F. Carter          Voice 310 825 2897    FAX 310 206 6673
UCLA-Mathnet;  6115 MSA; 405 Hilgard Ave.; Los Angeles, CA, USA  90095-1555
Email: jimc@math.ucla.edu    http://www.math.ucla.edu/~jimc (q.v. for PGP key)


           


