# mail/lojban-list thread 1f7b0cd941c4-translation_of_the_bladder_slugs_of_yik | root 9108242219.aa06670@luna.math.ucla.edu | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1991-08-24T22:19:01Z | cbmvax!uunet!math.ucla.edu!jimc | 9108242219.aa06670@luna.math.ucla.edu | mail/lojban-list/cur/683072341.1f7b0cd941c4f53e.jbomohi:2,S
                      The Bladder Slugs of Yik

Posted 91.8.14 by Alan Dench, Dept. of Anthro, U. Western Australia
<A_DENCH@fennel.cc.uwa.oz.au> on conlang@buphy.bu.edu (constructed
languages list), reposted by lojbab on lojban-list@snark.thyrsus.com.
Challenge is to translate the tense metaphors into Lojban.

------

Inferred physical situation: the Bladder Slugs orbit Arcturus IV, and
their orbit decays gradually but inevitably; the rate is under
voluntary control to some extent.  Offspring ascend to the top of the
exosphere by an unknown mechanism, then begin their inward spiral. 
Metaphors of impact and/or implosion from rising outside pressure are
used for the final event -- though physically I would expect more
meteoric results.

Generalization on tense: insofar as there is a 1-1 relation between
time and altitude, the directional properties ga'u-gapru-above and
ni'a-cnita-below can be substituted directly where humans would use
pu-purci-past and ba-balvi-future.  Where needed I have also used
vi-"at" or ne'a-lamji-next.to as a substitute for ca-cabna-same.time. 
in Lojban, both temporal and spatial tenses (directional properties)
fit the same syntactic sites <PU-BAI> and both can be elaborated in the
same ways, and hence there is no problem at all making a 1-1
replacement.  Comments below on expression problems, therefore, are
equally applicable to conventional time tenses.

Since this is going to at least one non-Lojbanist, I have put in extra
translation data.  poi is the structure word linking a restrictive
subordinate clause; I mark it RSC in the translations.  SSC marks a
supplementary or "by the way" clause.  EMK is one of various kinds of
endmarks.  Arguments (analogous to English noun phrases) typically
begin with what linguists call a "determiner", but to simplify I have
mostly omitted their translations.  "le" and "lo" are in this category.
The one exception is loi-the* which specifies a "mass individual", one
example of which is "the* lion lives in Africa".


A.  I perceived a large glabbage upperday.

mi ganse           lo jduboi   poi barda ku'o ga'u  pa  djedi
I  sense(stimulus) a  glabbage RSC big   EMK  above one day

    ganse - sense stimulus.  I failed to locate a good word for 
	"perceives the external reality" as opposed to "senses a 
	stimulus", which I use here.
    jduboi - jduli bolci - jelly sphere - glabbage.  Parallel diklujvo.
    ga'u pa djedi: See sentence E for explanation.

B.  The time for implosion is just below us.  

le nu    mi'o po'afa'e cu    ve'a           cnita mi'o
   event we   implode  "EMK" small-interval below us(you+me)

    po'afa'e - spoja fatne - explode reverse.order - implode.  Abstract
	diklujvo, somewhat questionable with existing place structure
	of fatne.

Though the English word "time" is used, in Lojban the x1 argument 
has nothing to do with time.  Instead a Lojban event abstraction is
used.  This pattern occurs several times in this text.

C.  The pressure increases; the light is dimming; I'm plummeting old.

   le ni       mi se      danre      cu zenba 
      quantity I  x1<->x2 pressed-on    increases
.i le ni       mi se      gusni       cu manze'a 
      quantity I  x1<->x2 illuminated    dims [dark increase]
.i mi bazo'i             no'eselsaifa'u
   I  future-approaching plummet

    manze'a - manku zenba - dark increase - dimming.  Abstract diklujvo
	except that the places of zenba don't clearly allow this 
	interpretation.
    zo'i: approaching (<PU> tense).  Because the selbri is spatial I have
	combined zo'i with a time tense "ba" for contrast, rather than 
	with ni'a (below).
    no'eselsaifa'u - no'e se sarji farlu - scalar-neutral x1<->x2 support
	fall - plummet (fall unsupported).  XXXfa'u is a parallel
	diklujvo.

Lojban allows "le ni se danre" etc., but I prefer a style in which for
each phrase as many places as reasonable are occupied  explicitly.

D.  How deep until we fall on dense times.  (Original appears to be 
    not a question but a discursive calling the listener's attention 
    to the size of the interval.)

condi fa le nu    mi'o       felda lo denmi
deep  x1    event we(you+me) fall     dense (something that is dense)

Again, time is irrelevant; this is translated by an event abstraction.

E.  Three days above I consumed a large splodj.

ga'u  lo djedi be li ci ku  mi citka lo danlysplodji   poi barda
Above a  day   times 3  EMK I  eat   a  (animal)splodj RSC big

    danlysplodji: I don't have the exact rules for this kind of 
	le'avla but it's at least close to legal.

Discussion of the time modal phrase:  djedi is defined as "x1 is x2
days long" (ignoring x3 as irrelevant here).  At first I was confused
trying to make this work in an old Loglan style, but then I recognized
that djedi was intended to be used the same way as a -gua!spi unit of
measure.  (Yes, this guy knows when he wins!)  The only problem is that
the sentence is placed at the top of an interval 3 days long, but where
does the interval start?  The place structure lacks an origin. One can
reasonably assume, though, that when a unit of measure is used
ordinally, as here, the start point is the current tense reference;
ra'i-kraji-origin has the right semantics for an explicit origin.  

It may be useful to list rejected modal phrases.

ga'u ci le djedi	Above three of the (different in extension) days.  
ga'u le ci djedi	Above the three (different) days.  
ne'a le ga'u djedi be li ci	At the aboveward 3-day interval -- not
			above the interval.  

F.  In the rarefied days of my youth, I set my life on a helical path.

ne'a le za'i  mi citno fi'o da'ecma     ku
At      state I  young RSCb dense-small EMK 

mi punji le pu'u    mi jmive kei lo pluta poi sarlu
I  set      process I  live  EMK    route RSC spiral

    da'ecma - denmi cmalu - dense small - rarefied: abstract diklujvo.

Again, "days" is irrelevant in Lojban; the modal phrase is translated
with an abstraction, in this case for a "state".  The bridi restrictive
subordinate clause (RSCb) says that "I am young" was low density, which
for the Bladder Slugs is clearly a tense metaphor; this is the only
past tense in the sentence.  (Technically, fi'o <bridi> is a tense in
Lojban.)

Lojban has no gismu (defined primitive word) for "helix"; however it
does have one for "spiral", which is physically more likely as the
Bladder Slug's path.

G.  The foolish Yik lives like a falling space rock.  (2 translations)

loi  selnatmryika poi bebna cu tarti   tai     loi  ru'u     rokci poi farlu
The* Yik          RSC fool     behaves in-form the* orbiting rock  RSC fall

.i simsa   fi le tarmi lo pu'u    tarti  ku  loi  selnatmryika poi bebna 
   Similar x3    form     process behave EMK the* Yik          RSC fool

loi  ru'u     rokci poi farlu
the* orbiting rock  RSC fall

    selnatmryika: From natmi = "x1 is a nation/ethnic group of peoples 
	x2" with the Yiks in x2.  This is slightly cheating on the 
	meaning of x2.  I hope the le'avla is morphologically correct.
    tarti: x1 behaves/conducts self as x2 circumstance x3.  "Alive" 
	really gets applied to the rock, which would be bogus 
	semantically.
    ru'u rokci: "ru'u-orbiting" is literally a tense in Lojban.  I very
	much dislike the metaphor pattern "space X"; I looked for and 
	found this alternative.
    simsa: x1 is similar to x2 in property x3.

The first translation is quite similar to the English sentence form. 
But the main point of the sentence is to say that X and Y are similar,
not to say that the* Yik behaves, and the second translation, more Lojban
style, makes "similar" the jufra selbri.  A defect of this sentence is,
what is behaving?  You have to guess that it's the Yik and the rock.
-gua!spi replication rules also can't get past "le tarmi".  I wonder if
a better x3 might be "fi lo pu'u ta'i tarti".  This lets -gua!spi style
replication stick x1 and x2 into x1 of tarti, but does this phrase
adequately express that the similar property is the form of behavior,
not the fact of behaving?

H.  At darkest bottom, we all meet at the centre.

ba              le dizrai noi manrai  
At(time-future)    lowest SSC darkest 

ro  ma'a             penmi lo fi'e vi        le midju
all we(you+I+others) meet  x1-copy at(space)    middle

    dizrai - dizlo traji - low superlative - lowest.  Abstract diklujvo.
    manrai - manku traji - dark superlative - darkest.  Abstract diklujvo.

I don't much like any of the choices for "darkest bottom":

    le dizrai noi manrai	the bottom, which by the way is darkest
    le dizrai poi manrai	of bottoms, the one which is darkest
    le dizrai po'u le manrai	the bottom, that is, the darkest place

Note with penmi-meet: the Lojban phrase says "we meet each other".

I.  The aliens, who live for eternity high above the days of our youth,
    believe the universe is expanding.  But according to the great 
    physicist Alblort Einslug, it is merely moving up into its own "past".

loi  fange noi piro ze'u               jmive ga'u  ve'u 
The* alien SSC all  long-time-interval lives above long-space-interval

le za'i  ma'a             citno cu  krici   
   state we(you+I+others) young EMK believe 

le pu'u    le munje  ca'o       calze'a
   process    cosmos continuous volume-increase

.i ku'i du'o     la     .alblort einslug. noi banli 
   But  known-by (name)  Alblort Einslug  SSC great 

le ka       skefa'i          ku'o le munje  nitkla le lofi'e purci
   property science-discover EMK     cosmos ascend    x1's   past

The required meanings are handled uneventfully by Lojban with one
exception: "merely".  I spent much time (maybe a month on and off)
struggling to translate "only", "merely" and "such" in Old Loglan and
later in -gua!spi, without success; finally I had to create a gismu.  I
refuse to repeat that task in Lojban.  Somebody else please translate
"merely".

Diklujvo:
    calze'a - canlu zenba - volume increase - expand.  Abstract diklujvo.
    skefa'i - saske facki - science discover - scientist.  If "science"
	is defined as "x1 is a scientific fact (about x2)", this works as a 
	transitive diklujvo.  
    nitkla  - cnita klama - below go - ascend.  Parallel diklujvo, motion
	word subtype.  The reason "below" is used rather than "above" is
	that x1 is related to x2, and during the motion the x1 (moving
	object) is below the destination.  

The following usages are plausible but not backed by known official
patterns:

    piro ze'u: use of the fractional "all" quantifier to suggest eternity.
    ze'u, ca'o: use of a <ZEhA> (space interval) or <ZAhO> (aspect) in a
	<PU-BAI> (elaborated tense) slot without an actual tense.
    lofi'e: which bridi does it extract an argument of?  Strictly 
	speaking, it grabs the output placeholder of the sumti, producing 
	the meaning "the past of itself" or "something which is its own 
	past" (if that has any meaning).  vo'a (or ledei?) hit the main 
	bridi, which in this sentence but not always is the one you want.
	I'm not sure of what anaphor will always work.
    le lofi'e purci: The official form would be le purci be lofi'e, but
	when the s-selbri is the kind accepting transitive arguments,
	one frequently interprets le X <selbri> as le <selbri> be X --
	even though there is no official rule allowing this transformation.

J.  All lives converge.  At impact we will share our common destiny.

de             se klama fo lo pu'u    ro  da poi jmive cu jmive 
There exists Y <x2 goes x4    process all X  RSC alive    live
(There exists Y which is the destination of an ensemble of motions, the 
route of each of which is the process of some X living, for all alive X.)

.ije  ca       le nu    da janli  kei da cmibi'o       
  And at(time)    event X  impact EMK X  member-become

lo se     kampu  be le ka       se dimna be de
   x2<->1 common       property destiny     Y

This is a tour de force of quantification.  The Bladder Slugs' situation
determines the semantics, but it has little to do with time metaphor.

Lojban lacks a proper "share" gismu, but also the semantics of "share"
in this sentence are bogus in that X has destiny Y from the beginning,
not just at the moment of impact.  I have, however, represented the
bogus semantics fairly faithfully.  But I had a great deal of trouble to
get the quantification right in the correct semantics.  Can anyone do
this right?

    klama-go: x1 goes to x2 from x3 via x4 (on legs x5).  Due to the needs
	of quantification, the selbri's place order is radically slewed
	around.  x2 = de, x4 = "life".
    litru-travel: The semantics are much better than farna-orientation
	or klama-go.  If it had a standard motion word place structure
	it could have been used here.
    ro da...: "the life process of everything that is alive".  It sounds
	stupid to repeat jmive, but "da" has to be restricted.
    janli-collide: x1 crashes into x2.  It is logical, but heavy-handed,
	to mention Y (de) as x2 of janli.
    cmibi'o - cmima binxo - member become: abstract diklujvo.  x1-x2 feeds
	into cmima x1-x2.  
    kampu-common: (abstract) x1 is common to (the members of set) x2.
	Hence X becomes a member of a set which has a common property Z
	(see below).  The set members of x2 in extension should feed into
	x1 of an abstraction which is in x1 of kampu.  The -gua!spi
	dictionary, but not the Lojban dictionary, prescribes this.
    dimna: (abstract) x1 is the destiny of x2.  The common property Z is
	having the destiny Y (de).  

K.  I hope our bladderlings will rise into the upper reaches of the
    brightest past.

.a'o    loi  gapydakcifnu poi se rirni  mi'o      cu nitkla 
(I)hope the* bladderling  RSC parent by we(you+I)    ascend 

le pagbu poi galtu be le selgusrai lo'i purci
   part  RSC high        brightest set  past

Diklujvo:
    gapydakcifnu - gapci dakli cifnu - gas bag baby - bladderling:  Two
	nested transitive diklujvo.  It seems to me that cifnu-baby will
	be used terminally in many compounds such as kitten, colt, 
	tadpole, anythingling.  Therefore it needs a terminal rafsi.
    nitkla - ascend: See sentence I.
    selgusrai - se gusni traji - illuminated superlative - brightest.  
	Abstract diklujvo using definition discussed below.

Probably bogus: poi se rirni mi'o.  The English sentence says "our
bladderlings", which literally translated means "which you and I are
the parents of".  But most likely "our" means "all Yiks'", in which
case "the* bladderling" (minus "our") is quite sufficient.  So the
RSC should be omitted entirely.  

Definitely bogus: le pagbu poi galtu be le...  The clauses are required
to be after the s-bridi with its arguments.  However, the result in
this instance is atrocious in style; required is G SSSS C (G =
s-selbri, SSSS = long sumti, C = clause) while you much prefer to have
the longer element after the shorter: G C SSSS. 

The real solution is to use le galtu pagbu be le... (creative tanru
whose meaning you can't be sure of) or le galpau be le... (matching
lujvo).  But pagbu = "x1 is a part of whole x2" with no place for a
selecting property.  galpau could be considered an abstract diklujvo
were the definition like this: "x1 is a part of x2 with common property
x3" -- in this case, the upper part.  A gismu, similarly defined, is
also needed for "subset".

I have a converse problem with traji-superlative.  It is "x1 is
superlative in property x2" but it should be defined as "x1 is (one of)
the extreme member(s) of set x2 in (abstract property) x3".  "One of"
is needed because ties are possible.

L.  I believe the shadows of our downtime bladderlings fell across us
    upperday.

.ia        le ctino  be le ma'a ni'a  gapydakcifnu 
(I)believe    shadow       our  below bladderling  

cu te      no'egu'i     ma'a ga'u   pa  djedi
   x3<->x1 unilluminate we   above  one day

This sentence is very philosophical, and so I have elected to translate
"our" less anally retentively this time, as "ma'a"-"you + I + unspecified
other(s)".  Expressing the riptime connections is equally successful
(or obscure) using human time <PU>'s or Bladder Slug spatial <PU>'s.

I suddenly notice that no'e is not listed as a rafsi; hence the usage
no'egu'i is questionable; perhaps it should be no'egusni.  Is there an
actual morphological reason to suppress no'e as a rafsi representing
no'e?  (And similarly for other <NAhE>.)

---------------

Conclusion: Lojban temporal and spatial tenses are highly parallel and
so it was a non-issue to deal with the Yik spatial tense metaphors.

This text has a number of diklujvo.  I would judge that even a person
unfamiliar with their guidelines for interpretation can accept their
meanings as plausible, no more uncertain than with any other unofficial
lujvo.  But the listener with access to the guidelines can interpret
them as surface structures representing a deep structure in which each
bridi or s-bridi is headed by a gismu; thus he can interpret these
lujvo with the same certainty (solipsist or uniform) that he can expect
for gismu.

James F. Carter        (213) 825-2897
UCLA-Mathnet;  6221 MSA; 405 Hilgard Ave.; Los Angeles, CA, USA  90024-1555
Internet: jimc@math.ucla.edu            BITNET: jimc%math.ucla.edu@INTERBIT
UUCP:...!{ucsd,ames,ncar,gatech,purdue,rutgers,decvax,uunet}!math.ucla.edu!jimc


