# mail/lojban-list thread 571622e65fa5-what_binxo_means | root 9105221903.aa12264@whistler.pic.ucla.edu | 3 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1991-05-22T19:03:43Z | cbmvax!uunet!pic.ucla.edu!jimc | 9105221903.aa12264@whistler.pic.ucla.edu | mail/lojban-list/cur/674939023.571622e65fa59842.jbomohi:2,S
The original discussion was on the need for the reciprocal operator soi,
but now it's on the adequacy of binxo "become".  Let's translate "my rat
died" using the interpretation of binxo that John Cowan gave, with a 
backmap of what this really means in its full glory:

  lemi ratcu cu binxo lo morsi
  At present my (present) rat is identical to at least one small stiff,
  but formerly there was no stiff that my (former) rat was identical to.

(The "at least one" part comes from binxo, not lo).  Now suppose someone
came up with this sentence from the lesson 1 exercises:

	la banthas. du lo mlatu		Bantha is (sic) a cat

We would tell the student "that's very nice, but the preferred way to say
that is..."

	la banthas. mlatu		Bantha cats

In other words, Lojban has predicates in its foundation, and prefers to
use them.  Now I say the same thing about binxo; the meaning "become"
*ought* to be rendered with a predicate analogously to "la banthas.
mlatu".  However, I see no gismu with a more suitable set of arguments
than binxo.  

In a previous message I said "binxo means 'x1 changes so event x2 becomes
true'", and John didn't like either the content or the event of saying.
Let me half apologize and half not apologize.  I don't mean to speak
authoritatively so as to imply "the LLG has adopted (the above) meaning
for binxo", which is manifestly false.  

However, as has been said many times, the focus of LLG work has been
mainly on morphology and grammar, and the semantics of the words,
specifically the place structures, are to be worked on in a near-future
phase.  For the present the Old Loglan definitions are used, with a few
hacks on the worst infelicities.   Thus when one sees 

	binxo  bix     bi'o become          become...under conditions...

one has very little guidance for what fits in the "..."  Into this
vacuum comes I, having sweated over exactly this problem since 1979
(gee, is it that long?)  It is hard not to say "binxo means..." where
politeness requires "binxo ought to mean... convince convince
convince", particularly when the focus is not on the meaning of binxo
but on how a reciprocal relation suddenly vanishes when a second
predicate gets into the act.

In the future I will try to say "ought to mean", but I plan not to clog
up net bandwidth with convincing arguments unless someone asks me
specifically, so as not to detract from the focus of the discussion.

Now, back to the content.  When I define "x1 changes so event x2 becomes
true" it's to be interpreted very much like my rendition above of sumti
binxo:

	lemi ratcu cu mrobi'o			My rat died
	lemi ratcu cu binxo (le nu lemi ratcu cu morsi)
	lemi ratcu cu cenba			My rat changed 
	  .ija lemi pu ratcu pu na morsi	My former rat wasn't dead
	  .ija lemi ca ratcu ca morsi		My present rat is dead

In other words, for each referent coming into x1 two predicate relations
(or sumti identity relations in John's place structure) are synthesized, 
one for an earlier process step and one later.  (The process is usually
timelike but not always.)  This is how an event "changes to become 
true"; there are two events, one is false and one is true.  

You can see how attractive "mrobi'o" is to express the idea of "died",
but either the user has to memorize the meanings and places of a
zillion individually crafted lujvo (one for each non-become-meaning
gismu and lujvo, plus similar lists for each of the gismu common in
compounds, like "stop", "force", "believe", etc. etc.), or there must
be rules that let the user boil down a lujvo (or tanru) to a collection
of phrases like "x1 binxo le nu x1 morsi".  And in order for the
synthesized phrases to mean something, it is necessary to replicate
arguments into them -- a capability which turns out to be useful for
explicit event arguments too.

One item about binxo that isn't too clear is what gets replicated,
words or referents.  In the examples above I replicated the words of x1,
once with "pa" and once with "cu" to get "my former/present rat". 
Given my emphasis on postponing the calculation of referent sets to the
very end, this is the choice I prefer.  An attractive alternative is to
consider each x1 referent to have a history or process trajectory, and
in the earlier-later relations to trace along that history.  While
conceptually attractive to humans, this model would be quite difficult
to program in a database handler and would require specialized support
just for binxo. However, when the words are replicated and the 
earlier-later copies are individually bound they will latch onto the
history automatically, if there is one, and the individual support
would be confined to generating the two relations, a much easier task.

		-- jimc



=== 2 | 1991-05-23T15:59:47Z | cowan | m0jgi4q-0001tac@snark.thyrsus.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/675014387.6bea42d7f2c3ba42.jbomohi:2,S
la djim. kartr. cusku di'e:
> Let's translate "my rat
> died" using the interpretation of binxo that John Cowan gave, with a 
> backmap of what this really means in its full glory:
> 
>   lemi ratcu cu binxo lo morsi
>   At present my (present) rat is identical to at least one small stiff,
>   but formerly there was no stiff that my (former) rat was identical to.
...
> [T]he meaning "become"
> *ought* to be rendered with a predicate analogously to "la banthas.
> mlatu".  However, I see no gismu with a more suitable set of arguments
> than binxo.  

I see the force of your objection.  "x1 becomes x2" has the difficulty
that x1 should still be self-identical after the change, and what are we
to do with "la xeris. binxo la selis."?  Does this really mean that Harry
becomes Sally?

I think my main difficulty results from your loose terminology w.r.t. events
and predications.  I take only the latter to have truth value.

	Nixon died in 1968.

is a predication, and has a truth value (false), whereas

	the event of Nixon's dying in 1968

is an event.  This event did not happen, but that does not make it >false<.
Therefore your "x1 changes so that event x2 is true" should be rewritten as
"x1 changes so that property x2 (a one-place predicate) is true of it".

This can be readily represented in Lojban.  The abstractor "du'u", grammatically
parallel to "nu", has the meaning "sentence/predication of":

	mi pu cusku le du'u la xeris. morsi
	I (past) express the predication-of Harry is-dead.
	I said that Harry was dead.

So under this interpretation of the "binxo" place structure, "my rat died" is:

	lemi ratcu binxo le du'u morsi
	my rat changes-so-that the predication-of (it)-is-dead is true

where the x1 place of "morsi" is elliptically the rat.

Of course, this is not official LLG doctrine.  :-)

-- 
cowan@snark.thyrsus.com		...!uunet!cbmvax!snark!cowan
		e'osai ko sarji la lojban



=== 3 | 1991-05-24T03:39:38Z | cbmvax!uunet!math.ucla.edu!jimc | 9105240339.aa17591@luna.math.ucla.edu | mail/lojban-list/cur/675056378.3e515c5511778b17.jbomohi:2,S
la djan. kou'n. cusku di'e:
> I see the force of your objection.  "x1 becomes x2" has the difficulty
> that x1 should still be self-identical after the change, and what are we
> to do with "la xeris. binxo la selis."?  Does this really mean that Harry
> becomes Sally?

Actually I had this problem in mind not for marriage but in connection
with 

	loi bisli cu likbi'o (likti binxo)
	Some ice     melts   (liquid become)

because after it melts it isn't ice.  "le bisli" would be OK since you
just assume that "bisli" cues an in-mind referent and nobody worries
that it doesn't fit the selbri afterward.  I think (not sure) that "da
poi bisli" is also OK because "da" is bound at the beginning (when it
fits the selbri) and is not rebound, so again it's irrelevant whether
it fits the selbri.

> I think my main difficulty results from your loose terminology w.r.t. 
> events and predications.  I take only the latter to have truth value.

In other words, every bridi (with arguments even if not specified by
words) expresses an event, but only some of them express predications,
called "claims" by some, "calling it to the listener's attention" by
others.  Specifically, jufra (main-level sentences) and clauses linked
with "noi" always call attention.  But look at "become" as a kind of
semantic universal, that is, independent of a particular language.  I
claim that "become" translates into three attention calls (claims):

	x1 changes
	x1 doesn't (pred) before
	x1 does (pred) afterward

Thus the (x1 pred) relation, which in most circumstances would be an 
event, mere relation fodder just as you say, becomes an attention call
(claim) because of the semantics of "become", whatever the usual effect
of its representation in Lojban.  (cenba "change" gives only the first
attention call.)  

> ...
> Therefore your "x1 changes so that event x2 is true" should be rewritten as
> "x1 changes so that property x2 (a one-place predicate) is true of it".

I pretty close to agree.  How about "x1 changes so bridi-tail x2
becomes true (was false and is later true) when x1 is replicated as its
first argument after conversion"?  How do the other arguments (if any)
get on the bridi-tail?  Next paragraph:

> This can be readily represented in Lojban.  The abstractor "du'u", 
> grammatically parallel to "nu", has the meaning "sentence/predication of":
> So under this interpretation of the "binxo" place structure, "my rat 
> died" is:
> 
> 	lemi ratcu binxo le du'u morsi
> 	my rat changes-so-that the predication-of (it)-is-dead is true
> 
> where the x1 place of "morsi" is elliptically the rat.
> Of course, this is not official LLG doctrine.  :-)

Let's see if I understand this one.  du'u is like nu except it also
makes the event it governs be a predication (claim)?  This would be fine
with a few additional comments:

a.  binxo still has to duplicate its x2 to give the "false before, true
after" part of its meaning.  This is equally necessary with du'u as with
any other solution.

b.  Users are certainly going to complain "why do I have to say ledu'u
when the meaning is implicit in binxo?  I don't like extra words."
Answer: Lojban does not at present have any transformation rules that
might change "mrobi'o" into "binxo le du'u (x1) morsi".  In place of the
statement "yeah, that's not supported" I would say "it happens so often
and with so many words, not just binxo, that maybe the rule ought to 
be added".  (However with most words the event argument has lenu, not
ledu'u; binxo is special that way.)

Returning to the head of the discussion, my major objection to the
(sumti) binxo (sumti) form is that for good reason we discourage
(sumti) du (sumti) when a predicate form is possible, e.g.

	la banthas. mlatu		la banthas. du lo mlatu
	Bantha      cats (preferred)	Bantha      is  a cat (deprecated)

Then ALL words tangled up with event arguments should be defined so that
a main phrase sumti ends up under a predicate -- not (sumti1) du (sumti2).
Thus:

	le ratcu cu binxo (le du'u vo'a morsa)
	the rat   becomes          it   is dead (preferred place structure)
	le ratcu cu binxo     (lo morsa)
	the rat  changes into a dead thing (jimc deprecates this place str.) 

Unfortunately the discussion started out on binxo which has other hard
features like du'u vs. nu, and the need to duplicate x2.

By the way, are you the same as cowan@marob.masa.com?

		-- jimc


