# mail/lojban-list thread 57b945ba90d5-machine_grammar_and_elidables | root 9105152246.aa01412@loop.uucp | 4 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1991-05-15T22:46:56Z | cbmvax!uunet!m2xenix!onion!tessi!loop!dont | 9105152246.aa01412@loop.uucp | mail/lojban-list/cur/674347616.57b945ba90d5702a.jbomohi:2,S

I would like to know how hard it would be to modify the ebnf grammar to
handle some or all of the elidables explicitly.

I suspect that either

	all the elidables are equivalently difficult to handle AND
	difficult to handle and the current grammar might not even
	be organized in a way that would make this feasible to do
or
	some of them are easier than others and at least the easy
	ones could be handled with small additions to the grammar.

I am very interested in how the grammar grows as these changes are made.
If each change doubles or quadruples the size of the grammar this tells
me something valuable.

I must admit that I don't have a lot of understanding about the grammar.
Would it be feasible for a person like myself to make such changes or is
the amount of knowledge of the language required beyond what I could do?
I have received short prose explanations that give a general idea of when
a word can be elided but these are not enough for me to use to turn into
formal grammar.

If I could not make the modifications is there someone else who would
assist me in doing this or would do this outright?


I have completed an ebnf to non-e bnf translator that accepts the notation
used by Cowan.  I am working on a parser for the language but held up at the
moment until I can see a copy of a thesis from 1968 to answer a question about
a detail of the parser.  I make no promises about availability of this work.

I watched the comments about software distribution, pricing, source
availability, etc.  I am not certain what to do with this work when it is
done.  I would be happy to listen to suggestions.

Thanks
Don Taylor
503-235-6853
loop!dont@tessi.UUCP
dont@loop.UUCP
tessi!loop!dont@nosun.west.sun.com




=== 2 | 1991-05-17T13:17:00Z | cbmvax!uunet!bigd.cray.com!dmb | 9105171317.aa01341@bigd.cray.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/674486220.0610356f752ca54a.jbomohi:2,S
Don,

   You write:
>I would like to know how hard it would be to modify the ebnf grammar to
>handle some or all of the elidables explicitly.

>I suspect that either

>	all the elidables are equivalently difficult to handle AND
>	difficult to handle and the current grammar might not even
>	be organized in a way that would make this feasible to do
>or
>	some of them are easier than others and at least the easy
>	ones could be handled with small additions to the grammar.

>I am very interested in how the grammar grows as these changes are made.
>If each change doubles or quadruples the size of the grammar this tells
>me something valuable.

>I must admit that I don't have a lot of understanding about the grammar.
>Would it be feasible for a person like myself to make such changes or is
>the amount of knowledge of the language required beyond what I could do?
>I have received short prose explanations that give a general idea of when
>a word can be elided but these are not enough for me to use to turn into
>formal grammar.

>If I could not make the modifications is there someone else who would
>assist me in doing this or would do this outright?

   I was looking at this issue a few weeks ago.  I concluded that we could
eliminate "cu" with only a minor change in the grammar, without introducing
any ambiguities.  The cost would be an increase in the number of cases where
a preceeding "ku" is not elidable.  I ought to double check those conclusions
because they were done by hand.  I haven't had the time to type in the
grammar and feed it to my local YACC.  I suspect that the situation with
some of the other elidables may be similar; one elidable can be eliminated
at the cost of requiring another in more cases.  Such changes would also
eliminate one area of Lojban style, the choice of elidables to elide.

   As far as experimenting with the grammar, I'd say the key ingredients
are an understanding of formal grammars and access to tools such as YACC.
With those ingredients you can start with your changes, feed them to YACC,
and then look at the output.  Probably your changes will have introduced
some ambiguities and so you will need to look at them and rework the grammar
to eliminate them.  Keep iterating until you finally eliminate all of the
ambiguities.  You also need to keep checking that you don't lose any
expressiveness in the process.  The more you know, the easier all of this
is, but those basics aren't all that hard to acquire.

David Bowen



=== 3 | 1991-05-17T18:56:45Z | cowan | m0je9yq-0003ksc@snark.thyrsus.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/674506605.a7742a38d70edf52.jbomohi:2,S
David Bowen writes:
>    I was looking at this issue a few weeks ago.  I concluded that we could
> eliminate "cu" with only a minor change in the grammar, without introducing
> any ambiguities.

In the grammar the parser actually implements, "cu" is no longer an elidable
in the formal sense -- it is actually optional, i.e. there are separate
rules for cu-present and cu-omitted.  That's why your test worked.
"fa'o" is also now treated specially, not as a regular elidable.

As for the others, "ku'o" is the only one known to be always elidable
if nothing else is elided.  All the others are needed at least sometimes,
and we keep "ku'o" for symmetry and because it sometimes makes it possible
to elide more than one consecutive terminator by inserting it.

We didn't define the elidables for fun.  All of them, modulo the three
special cases here, are required to keep conflicts out of the grammar.
Many were put in specifically because the presence of conflicts was
reported during machine-grammar development.

-- 
cowan@snark.thyrsus.com		...!uunet!cbmvax!snark!cowan
		e'osai ko sarji la lojban



=== 4 | 1991-05-18T03:40:00Z | lojbab | m0jeia3-0003kkc@snark.thyrsus.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/674538000.6722d214e8f2dcd0.jbomohi:2,S
On David Bowen's comments on dont's attempt to eliniate elidables:
1. David is correct that "cu" is optional, in the language and exists only to
make elision of other elidables before the selbri easy.  Indeed, John Cowan
has made this explicit in one of his proposed baseline modifications.
2. Our analysis shows a similar situation for "ku'o" - it is always optional, but using it may make other elidables easy to elide.
3. John Cowan's attempt at parser buiding led him to explore "fa'o" and to
determin that it is no longer needed or useful in the grammar.  He is proposing
its elimination as a resolution of the only significantly outstanding parser
a major difficulty in constructing a YACC 
parser.  I  am in favor of this change.
4. Most other elidables are not optionals - they truly terminate something that
has no other way of being ended, in at least one case.  Before August '89
these were only two or three terminators (mostly "ku").  They were broken out 
into separate selma'o  specifically to make it easier to elide them, and to tell
what structure a given terminator was eliding.  Before then, it was trivial to
construct sentences that required 4, 5, or 6 "ku"s in a row to terminate things.
properly and to make sure things grouped the way you wanted them to.  The c
change to this was approved by all active students of the language at the time,
and was among the reasons for the Lesson4/Lesson 4A rewrite, and my soon t
thereafter decision that the entire textbook would need rewriting before it
could be published.
By making the language more speaker-and-listener friedndly by expanding the
terminators, we made it even harder to do what you are trying to do, I think.
It is extremely difficult in the current grammar to mess with the elidables
- minor change can lead to major conflicts.

The primary requirement you need is thorough familiarity with the verbose
listing output by YACC, listing all states, and the go-tos/shifts/reduces
that take place depending upon the look-ahead token.  The ultimate Lojban
formal grammar IS that set of states produced by YACC, since we regard the YACC
grammar (and NOT the E-BNF) as the legitimate standard of the Lojban grammar.

We have some pragmatic rules for many of the elidables; i.e. times that you
cannot elide "ku" at the end of a sumti include any time it is followed by
any token that can start off a selbri (the list is large so expanding this
one elidable would multiply the grammar by an order of magnitude in my belief
- and it maight then no longer be LALR 1).  "kei" is even tougher, since what
can follow depends on what came before.  In "le nu broda [kei]" the "kei"
cannot be elided if the next tokenm is the possible start of either a selbri
OR a sumti; in "le nu broda ko'a" elision is forbidden if the next token
starts a term (i.e. a sumti or tcita sumti).  But "ku" can be used instead of
"kei" in this instance and it will always work and always allow "kei" to
be elided, since it terminates the "le" sumti that the "nu broda ...[kei]"
abstraction is inside.

Another problem for would-be grammar experimenters.  The Lojban grammar is
not much larger than most computer languages, but its degree of recursive
and overlapping constructions leads to a lot of states in the state table.
We needed a specially designed version of YACC, produiced by Abraxas (PCYACC),
with elevated limits for some table size limits and compiled under "Huge"
model, in order to even YACC the last few grammars.  John Cowan reports that
he is having less trouble on UNIX systems, but even there you have to watch
your table limits, I'm sure, especially if you want to try something like don
is.

In short, I do not believe the effort will bear much fruit, and I would only
recommend it as an excuse to learn the grammar - you WILL have to do that in
order to make any progress at all.  And remember that we are going to be
very prejudiced against changes that in some way restrict usages that we have
already taught or used in the language.  Almost all proposed changes now either
have no effect on most day-to-day usage, or expand the capabilities thereof.
This makes an elidable eliminating effort even more difficult than it might
otherwise be.

-lojbab


