# mail/lojban-list thread 6d005ec06450-cleft_place_structures | root m0jinna-0001g8c@snark.thyrsus.com | 7 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1991-05-29T10:03:00Z | lojbab | m0jinna-0001g8c@snark.thyrsus.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/675511380.6d005ec06450863f.jbomohi:2,S
Art Protin asks:
>Can we get a more precise definition of cleft place structures?

A cleft place structure is one which has two places, one an actor, and the
other an event clause for which the actor is the agent.  Thus, in expressing
a sentence using such a place structure, you either redundantly express the
actor or elliptically omit the actor in a way that is very non-lojbanic.

Example using galfi (cleft place structure in x1/x4)

mi galfi le blanu bitmu le xunre bitmu lenu [mi] cinta preja
I modify the blue wall into the red wall by the-event [I] paint-spread.

In contrast, a united place struture will have only the event clause, usually
up front.  Thus a proposed revision of galfi would give:

lenu mi cinta preja cu galfi le blanu bitmu le xunre bitmu
The event-of me paint-spreading modifies the blue wall into the red wall.

This united place structure has the difficulty of accessing the actor (me)
in a later sentence, by methods familiar to natural language speakers.
You can say "le cinta preja", but not "le galfi", since the modifier is an
event, not a person.

There is a possible solution that I have not yet mentioned, because I want
more feedback to make sure that we understand the problem.

The problem, in addition to the defective logical structure of cleft places, i
is that If we use united places, English and other natural language idiom
no longer translates literally.  You have to rephrase the sentence to fit the
less natural-languagy place structure.  This makes those place structures
harder to learn and internalize for the new Loglanist, because life-long
habits must be overcome.  It can be done, however.  An example of the united
place structure is:
lenu mi cinta preja cu mulno
The-event-of me paint-spreading is complete.

The cleft place structure version, not legal for mulno (which was changed early)
is:

*mi mulno lenu [mi] cinta preja.
I'm done [with the event of[me] paint-spreading.

----
lojbab = Bob LeChevalier, President, The Logical Language Group, Inc.
         2904 Beau Lane, Fairfax VA 22031-1303 USA
         703-385-0273
         lojbab@snark.thyrsus.com



=== 2 | 1991-05-29T15:07:44Z | "Arthur W. Protin Jr." <cbmvax!uunet!PICA.ARMY.MIL!protin> | 9105291107.aa13687@cor4.pica.army.mil | mail/lojban-list/cur/675529664.eb6c5dfd9b156c75.jbomohi:2,S
Folks,
    I guess I responded to lojbab's request too soon.  The
systemization that I spoke up for has little or nothing to do 
with the problem under discussion.  Sorry.

    Without many examples to bias my interpretation of those
gismu definitions, I would have tried to elipse all of the
sentence (I wanted the lojban word here but I forget which
one it is "bridi"?) of "I paint-spread red on the wall" except
for "paint-spread".  I would look up a cmavo to abstact the
brivda (again, I am without my cheat sheet), something like "lo".
The result would have been like:

mi galfi le blanu bitmu le xunre bitmu lo cinta preja
I modify the blue wall into the red wall by the "relation" paint-spread.

Now, I am sure that "lo" is not the right word because the right
one probably needs a terminator.  (PS. the use of "le" in the
examples has changed my mind about a needed terminator.)
The closest thing in English to what I would do is the gerund,
a verb that becomes a noun by its usage. Thus the translation
would more figuratively be:

I modify the blue wall into the red wall by paint-spreading.

This has the obvious drawback for computers and other droids
that there is an implied sentence that can only be constructed
by the semantic content of the original.  The implied sentence
(guessing at the place structure of "preja" and using HH as the past
indicator):

mi HH preja le xunre cinta le blanu bitmu
I did spread the red paint on the blue wall.

The revised place structure and its sample usage don't buy
much since a x1/x4 exchange indicator would suffice with the 
old place structure (and leaving the displaced x1 elipsed).
And suppose I want to elipse or otherwise omit the event/process
(relation) by which the modification was accomplished but
still identify the agent that brought about the modification.

    thank you all,
    Art


Arthur Protin <protin@pica.army.mil>
These are my personal views and do not reflect those of my boss
or this installation.



=== 3 | 1991-05-30T15:02:15Z | John Cowan <cbmvax!snark.thyrsus.com!cowan> | m0jiow1-0002r6c@snark.thyrsus.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/675615735.b353725641d510dd.jbomohi:2,S
Arthur Protin wishes to consider the sentence:

	mi galfi le blanu bitmu le xunre bitmu le nu cinta preja
	I modify the blue wall into the red wall by paint-spreading.

This represents the cleft place structure of "galfi":

	x1 modifies x2 into x3 by doing/being x4

He argues that the suggested replacement,

	the event x1 modifies x2 into x3

is equivalent to the old place structure with x1 and x4 swapped and the
old x1 elided.

A difficulty with his view arises when the one-who-modifies (old x1) and
the actor of the event (x1 of abstraction within old x4) are not the same.
The old place structure treats as legitimate sentences like:

	 I modify the blue wall into the red wall
		by the act of your spreading paint.

But if you are doing the paint spreading, in what sense am I thought to be
the "one who modifies?"  The new place structure eliminates the possibility
of saying such (seemingly) self-contradictory things.

-- 
cowan@snark.thyrsus.com		...!uunet!cbmvax!snark!cowan
		e'osai ko sarji la lojban



=== 4 | 1991-05-31T14:18:55Z | cbmvax!uunet!ctr.columbia.edu!shoulson | 9105311644.aa07963@relay2.uu.net | mail/lojban-list/cur/675699535.b726d6ca708cc0aa.jbomohi:2,S
Um, this may be a Red Herring, but it seems to me that these cleft place
structures have a lot in common with relative clauses.  I mean, the
complaint is that the actor gets re-used in a subortinate clause which
indicates how the change was effected or whatever.  Note that the actor of
the main sentence need not be the actor of the subordinate one (for lack of
a better term.  Note also that "actor" doesn't have that much of a meaning
in Lojban, nor does the x1 place deserve spectial treatment.  But the label
is convenient), nor does the actor even need to appear in the subordinate
clause (e.g. Arthur Protin's Iraqi example, "I will modify our country's
borders by your invasion of Kuwait.")

It seems that you ought to allow the use of ke'a (that's the relative
pronound, yes?) in such constructions to refer to the actor of the main
clause (oh, dear, that gives x1 special treatment.  Oh, well, I think it's
happened elsewhere.)  Obviously, the grammar doesn't care (isn't ke'a just
a pro-sumti, like mi or do?), but the semantics seem to work, at first
glance.  It may be that in order to avoid these cleft places, it might be
best to excise the places in which they occur and use BAI clauses sort of
like poi with ke'a or whatever to express them.

Hope that's not too bad a case of "simple solution to complex problem"
disease.

co'omi'e mark.



=== 5 | 1991-05-31T22:24:28Z | cbmvax!uunet!math.ucla.edu!jimc | 9105312224.aa24764@luna.math.ucla.edu | mail/lojban-list/cur/675728668.a58b8fc0c1649379.jbomohi:2,S
> Date:  Fri, 31 May 91 12:44:17 -0400
> From:  shoulson@sirius.ctr.columbia.edu (Mark Shoulson)

> Um, this may be a Red Herring, but it seems to me that these cleft place
> structures have a lot in common with relative clauses.  

I also see the analogy.  In a subordinate clause the modified object is
assumed present in the first place after conversion of the clause. I'm
not sure how this is accomplished, but ke'a (right?) represents the
modified object, suitable for explicit placement in other cases (sorry
-- places).  There are also anaphora <digit>fi'e (like pa fi'e) to
represent explicitly the N'th place of the containing phrase.

In my ideal world filled with replicated sumti, the modified object 
anaphor would be provided automatically (if not user-provided) very
much like the anaphora for replicating into or out of abstract sumti.

A small point: just what is the replicated object?  Example:

	le mlatu poi         nenri  le mapku
	the cat  restrictive inside the hat

Is the occupant of nenri x1 "the cat", a sumti or...

	mi bajra fi'o  nenri  kuo       le kumfa
	I  run   (tag) inside (tag end) the room

is nenri x1 an abstract sumti something like "lo nu mi bajra"? (And is
this syntax right, particularly is kuo needed?  I know about ne'i but I
need to use fi'o.)  The first  interpretation is very natural, but if
the idea of modal operators is to add nonstandard cases to the brivla
relation, then they should relate the phrase arguments (hat, room) to
the superior bridi or s-bridi, not to its x1 occupant(s).  

In the first example the cat-thing is an x1 occupant of mlatu and what
I would like to see is that the bridi "x1 mlatu" is related to the hat.
In other words, "the relation of the sumti referent catting occurs
(restrictive) within the hat".  This isn't what we usually think of for
a subordinate clause on a sumti, but if you think about what's really
going on, that's really what it means.  

		-- jimc



=== 6 | 1991-05-30T23:33:37Z | "Arthur W. Protin Jr." <cbmvax!uunet!PICA.ARMY.MIL!protin> | 9105301933.aa03102@cor4.pica.army.mil | mail/lojban-list/cur/675646417.8dd2702476b9d403.jbomohi:2,S
Folks,
    I argue this point largely as a representative of the
community's inertia.  Add to that some appreciation of the
role of devil's advocate and a small measure of real support
for the position.

    In the debate about the nature of "events", as some places
of gismu are called, I argued that a relation (my word for what
I think is "brivda") can be used without any of its places being
populated and I offer the following example (without having time
to check that I am using the correct cmavo (I still don't)):

        mi galfi le blanu bitmu le xunre bitmu le nu cinta preja
        I modify the blue wall into the red wall by paint-spreading.

I further argued that the proposed actorless place structure
(definition) is the old one with an x1/x4 swap and x1 elided.
John Cowan is concerned that the existing definition allows
constructs like:

         I modify the blue wall into the red wall
                by the act of your spreading paint.

But I am not!
While my role in your paint-spreading may not always be
obvious, I also feel that it need not always be explained.

I can imagine a great many situations where the role is
sufficiently obvious.  One that I hope will convey the
sense of it is Saddam addressing his troops last August
and saying

	I modify our countries border by your invasion
		of Kuwait.

On a much more philosophical note, any act that I could prevent,
that I allowed to happen, I am an agent in.  Thus if I in any
way facilitated your paint-speading, I can be said to have modified
the wall.

(Now, can some one tell me with some degree of certainty, that
"le nu" is the correct indication for attaching the relation
"cinta preja"?  John, didn't I use just "le"?)

    thank you,
    Art Protin


Arthur Protin <protin@pica.army.mil>
These are my personal views and do not reflect those of my boss
or this installation.




=== 7 | 1991-05-31T17:47:17Z | "Arthur W. Protin Jr." <cbmvax!uunet!PICA.ARMY.MIL!protin> | 9105311347.aa27356@cor4.pica.army.mil | mail/lojban-list/cur/675712037.d5cab36881e079b1.jbomohi:2,S
Folks,
    I started this mostly as inertia, resistance to change.
Now I find that I rationally oppose the suggested revision
to "galfi" to address the "cleft place structure" problem.

    Commuting home last night I thought about the problem
and I not only find John Cowan's argument insufficiant but
I now think that it is inappropriate: W-S ALERT.  I expect
the language to allow me to freely express bizarre ideas
without the interference of the "language police".  Just
as I should be allow to say 

	I modify the blue wall into the red wall
                by the act of your spreading paint.

I should also be allowed to say

        le  nu     mi mlatu   HH
	The act of me catting is the process which

		galfi    le blanu bitmu     le xunre lalxu
		modified the blue wall into the red lake.

where HH is either the x1/x4 swapping indicator for the old
definition of galfi or is nothing for the new one.


IT IS INAPPROPRIATE FOR THE LANGUAGE SYNTAX TO BE MODIFIED TO
RESTRICT WHAT CAN BE SAID.  (I have no objection to making
nonsense look like nonsense, but nonsense still has to be allowed.)
----


In thinking about the cleft place structure problem I found
I wanted some indicators (cmavo) that I could not find (I may
have actually seen them in the list but did not recognize them
as the indicators that I wanted.)  I will describe the bunch of
them and their usage using symbols that are outside of the
language. 

    Let me call them here "Hi", "H1'o", "H1'a", "H2'o", "H2'a" ....
The first of these, "Hi", binds to a predicate ("brivla"?) and
the others are pseudo-predicates (like "mo").  

    (I have a little problem, I forgot to lookup the three
    basic tense indicators so please substitute them in
    where I use "hp" for past, "hc" for present, and
    "hf" for future. (It is annoying that these had to
    change from loglan).)

The pseudo-predicates come in matched pairs, "H1'o" with "H1'a",
and I am not sure how many are needed.  The first of each
pair ,"'o", is the (radical) binding form while the other
is the bound form.  The binding form takes is definition from
the usage and the bound form allows that definition to be
referenced.  The first example of usage assumes delusions
of grandeur on my part:

    la dactr. braun. hp H1'o 	.i la lojbab. hc H1'o 
    Dr. Brown        was this-pred.  Lojbab is this-pred.

    .i mi hf H1'a
       I will-be that-pred.

The purpose of the indicator "Hi" is to reference a predicate
without allowing any of its place structure to be occupied.
The indicator "le" references the thing which occupies a
place.  (Since I don't have a predicate for the above example,
let us imagine that one was/is/will-be found and read it
in place of the symbol "HreHo")

    Hi             HreHo              du     Hi H1'a
    the predicate (what-ever-we-find) equals ...that-pred.

(Gosh, this looks really strange with one one real word
in it.)

This indicator, "Hi", that I want is the one that I thought was
the appropriate one for use to reference the 4th place of galfi.

As in

        mi galfi le blanu bitmu le xunre bitmu Hi cinta preja
        I modify the blue wall into the red wall by paint-spreading.

Thus, while I would be allowing you to believe that I paint-spread
to modify the wall, I am not saying that, nor am I saying that
it was one event, nor am I saying that red paint was spread.
If I want to express these details I will follow this statement
with others that elaborate.  If you feel a need to know these
details you will inquire.

While we are on this example again, what is wrong with saying

        mi galfi le blanu bitmu le xunre
        I modify the blue wall into the red [thing].

or

        mi galfi le blanu bitmu lo xunre
        I modify the blue wall into a red [thing].

where either we both know that the red thing is the wall that
we knew as blue OR we both know what other red thing it became
OR I am being dishonest by allowing you to think that the
result was a red wall.  I see the second of this pair as
saying that the thing we knew as the blue wall was changed
such that it is now really red and we can still refer to it
as the blue wall.
Interestingly the sentence 

        mi galfi le blanu bitmu le xunre bitmu
        I modify the blue wall into the red wall

seems to require only the revision of the reference.  Thus

        mi galfi le blanu bitmu le xunre bitmu dei pamoi
        I modify the blue wall into the red wall by this utterance

can easily be true because you will now know that what we
called the blue wall we now call the red wall.

    thank you all,
    Arthur Protin


Arthur Protin <protin@pica.army.mil>
These are my personal views and do not reflect those of my boss
or this installation.


