# mail/lojban-list thread 84a37d9b41cb-polish_story,_paragraph_6_%28penultimate%29 | root 9107252347.aa14001@munagin.ee.mu.oz.au | 2 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1991-07-25T23:47:50Z | cbmvax!uunet!ee.mu.OZ.AU!nsn | 9107252347.aa14001@munagin.ee.mu.oz.au | mail/lojban-list/cur/680485670.84a37d9b41cb897e.jbomohi:2,S

Numa levis petegantan vizagxon de la herboj, kovritaj de la roso kaj respondis
per demando:

--- Sed ili, Sinjoro?

--- Vi ankoraux pensas pri ili. Mi do ne sendos vin al Etruskoj, sed prenos
en mian cxielon. Jen etendigxas al vi la flugilo de mia aglo. Gxi estas largxa
kaj mola. Metu sur gxin viajn membrojn, lacajn de la tera laboro, kaj sur la
delikataj ondoj de l' aero flugu en la spacon de l' senmorta felicxo!

Numa ree demandis:

--- Sed ili, Sinjoro? sed miaj Romanoj?

--- Vi ankoraux pensas pri ili! pensu pri via Egerio. Sxi estas cxielanino, kaj
vi, filo de la tero. Sole sekrete kaj malofte vi povas vidi sxin apud la bordo
de l' rivereto, kiu farigxis el sxiaj larmoj. Via morto trancxos la fadenon
de via amo. Vi ne vidos sxin en malluma Erebo, kaj por sxi mia Olimpo farigxos
malluma Erebo. Jen mi sendas el mia arko fulmon; kaptu en viajn manojn la
fajran rubandon, gxi alportos vin al Egerio kaj al la eterna felicxo.

Numa lifted a begging face from the grass, covered with dew and answered
with a question.

--- But them, Lord?

--- You still think about them. So I won't send you to the Etruscans, but
will take you into my heaven. Lo, there stretches out to you the wing of
my eagle. It is wide and soft. Put on it your members, tired from earthly
work, and on the delicate waves of the air fly into the space of immortal
happiness!

Numa asked again:

--- But they, Lord? But my Romans?

--- You still think about them! Think about your Aegeria. She is an inhabitant
of heaven, you a son of the earth. Only secretly and rarely can you see her
by the edge of the little river, which was made from her tears. Your death will
cut the string of your love. You will not see her in dark Erebus, and for
her my Olympus will become a dark Erebus. Lo, I send a lightningbolt from
my bow; catch the fiery ribbon in your hands, it will take you to Aegeria
and eternal happiness.

ni'o la numam. lafti leko'a flira ne seci'o le kazycaicpe fo lei srasu noi se
gacru lo ctejau gi'e fracru sepi'o lo preti

Numa lifted He1's face (which had emotion the quality of intense request)
from the grass which was covered by night water and react-said using a question.

.ilu doi cevni lemi se natmi mo li'u

"O god my constituents of the nation will be what?"

.ilu do caca'a pensi ri .iseki'ubo mi na'e klari'a do le natrtruski. gi'e
bevri do lemi tsani

"You now actually think of them . For this reason I will do something other
than make you go to the Etruscans, and will carry you to my heaven.

.i le nalci be lemi cipnrakuila. tcena do .i le go'i cu ganra je ranti

The wing of my (bird) eagle stretches to you. The same is wide and soft.

.i ko punji ledo xadni noi tatpi ki'u le remna nu gunka ku'o le go'i

Place your body (which is tired because of the human work) onto it.

.ije ga'a loi ralci boxna be lo vacri ko voikla le canlu pe lo nungleki poi
noroi sisti li'u

And over the delicate waves in the medium of the air fly into the space
associated with the event of being happy which never stops."

the air fly into the space
associated with the event of being happy which never stops."

la numam. si'a te preti fi lu lemi se natmi mo .i lei se la'ornai mo li'u

Numa similarly was the asker of the question "The consituents of my nation
will be what? The constituents of the latin nation will what?"

.ilu do pujecaca'a pensi ri .ue .i ko pensi lado .egeriam. i ri goi ko'i 
tsanyxa'u .i do xabju le tedyplini

"You were and are now actually thinking of them (surprised). Think of the one
called Aegeria associated with you. She (She3) is a heaven inhabitant. You
inhabit the earth planet. (le terdi does not mean the earth. In fact, le
jegvo does not mean JHVH [according to the 1990 list John Cowan has been
following], but "that which pertains to...").

.i do so'uroi viska tai lenu mipri kei sekai lenu do kasna noda kei ko'i ne
ne'a lo rirxe poi se zbasu fi leiko'i klakyjau

You a few times see, in the manner of being secret, characterised by the
event of you being with nobody, her3 who is next to a river built out of
she3's weeping water.

.i lenu do morsi cu katna stiri'a ledo nunpra .i do baku'anoroi viska ko'i
vuzu la .erebos. noi manku

The event of you being dead will cut make cease your love. You will-intersect-
never see her3 in the great far region of Erebus which is dark

.icabo ci'o ko'i lami .Olimpos. binxo la .erebos. noi manku .i ko zgana lenu
mi benji do lo lidni lemi cectci

At the same time, as emoted by her, my Olympus will become an Erebus which is
dark. Observe that I send you a lightning bolt from my bent launcher.

.i ko kavbu le fagri dasri ledo xance .i le sego'i bevri do la .egeriam. e lo
nungleki poi noroi sisti li'u

Capture the fire ribbon with your hand. The second argument of the last 
predication will carry you to Aegeria and to an event of happiness which never
ceases."



=== 2 | 1991-07-26T10:31:00Z | cbmvax!uunet!ctr.columbia.edu!shoulson | 9107261359.aa07026@relay2.uu.net | mail/lojban-list/cur/680524260.7bb3012ca2b12ea1.jbomohi:2,S
la nitcion. cusku di'e:
>ni'o la numam. lafti leko'a flira ne seci'o le kazycaicpe fo lei srasu noi se
>gacru lo ctejau gi'e fracru sepi'o lo preti
>Numa lifted He1's face (which had emotion the quality of intense request)
>from the grass which was covered by night water and react-said using a question.

Is this legal for {sepi'o}?  Somehow the meaning here seems too abstract
for {sepi'o} to give the right meaning.  Whatever.

>.i le nalci be lemi cipnrakuila. tcena do .i le go'i cu ganra je ranti
>The wing of my (bird) eagle stretches to you. The same is wide and soft.

Can you use {go'i} this way?  I've been a bit troubled by {go'i} lately,
working on the Marquis' journal using some of Nick's suggestions.  Does
{go'i} mean a repeat of the last bridi, or the last jufra?  And exactly
what do you mean by the last bridi?  "mi klama le zdani" "go'i".  Now,
"zdani" here is a bridi (with everything ellipsiszed).  Is this the bridi
that go'i refers to?  I doubt it.  What about "mi xenru lenu do cu klama"
"go'i".  Here, we have "do klama", which is in some sense a more complete
seeming bridi than the previous example (and not just because it has more
sumti).  Is *this* go'i?  I don't think so either.  I think go'i refers to
jufra, not bridi.  Thus, Nick's uses of it in his corrections of Twery's
journal don't really work any better than mine (i.e.  they're both wrong.)
Unless you're using it as you do later on, "le go'i"=="the first sumti in
the previous jufra."  I wasn't aware of that capability.  Actually, I was
going to ask if there was a way to refer to a given sumti of a previous
jufra.  Maybe this is my answer.

>.ilu do pujecaca'a pensi ri .ue .i ko pensi lado .egeriam. i ri goi ko'i 
>tsanyxa'u .i do xabju le tedyplini
>"You were and are now actually thinking of them (surprised). Think of the one
>called Aegeria associated with you. She (She3) is a heaven inhabitant. You
>inhabit the earth planet. (le terdi does not mean the earth. In fact, le
>jegvo does not mean JHVH [according to the 1990 list John Cowan has been
>following], but "that which pertains to...").

Using {lado} is asking for trouble.  I couldn't find proof that the grammar
forbids it, but consider what would happen if the following word hadn't
begun with a vowel.  How would you tell "lado mark." from "la domark."?  I
suppose "lado .mark." would require a pause before the name.  I'd use la
.egeriam. ne do or something.
"jegvo" is now just "pertains to"?  You just re-used the gismu for a
totally unrelated meaning?  Yow.  Oh, well.  I can't complain.  I just
can't wait 'til Bob gets a chance to send us the new gismu and cmavo lists.

~mark


