# mail/lojban-list thread 99ae5dcf2f79-lojban_duplications | root 9111010047.aa02872@julia.math.ucla.edu | 2 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1991-11-02T12:53:58Z | cbmvax!uunet!MATH.UCLA.EDU!pucc.PRINCETON.EDU!jimc | 9111011735.aa05135@relay1.uu.net | mail/lojban-list/cur/689086438.87ea117dcb67856d.jbomohi:2,S
Art Protin <usl!protin@USL.USL.COM> writes:
> While I will accept that some of the add-on-places are really
> restrictive clauses, I am not receptive to a limted, bounded, definitive
> list other than the numbered places.  My understanding of lojban/Loglan
> NEVER had this hangup about unfilled places.

A recent post of mine shows what a pain it is to be stuck with a
rigidly specified set of "essential" places -- yet I feel it isn't
possible to claim Lojban is a "logical" language unless at least some
effort is made to specify precisely what the predicate relations are.
Or to state the contrapositive: Lojbab says that in order to be a
"real" language, a conlang has to allow that the places of gismu, and
both places and core definition of lujvo, are as renegotiable as a
government contract, so that (jimc's inference) it's impossible to
state in a public or global manner what the predicate relations are.
Therefore it's impossible for a "real" language, constructed or not, to
be a predicate language.  I'm not saying that the conclusion is wrong
(yet); but I don't like it one little bit.

Nonetheless, it's clear to me that there are too many numbered places
on some gismu (e.g. the transport means on some but not all motion
words) yet essential places leap out at you that you never would have
thought of when writing the dictionary (e.g. river of WHAT, or the
transport means on cadzu, where I really needed it to make "crawl"),
and intermixed with these are the pervasive context and supplementary
places which are clearly not essential parts of the relation (e.g.
speaker ID, or language of expression, or exemplar, or I think tenses).

Bob Chassell's point is well taken that the predicate relation is the
key to predicate languages.  Art's is well taken that you need to be
able to decline to state the occupants of various places.  And Lojbab's
point is well taken that if we're going to use the language in real
life, we can't afford to get bogged down with infinitely many junk
places.

When dealing with problems like this one, I find it very useful to make
a mechanistic computational model -- the database or Prolog model is
very applicable to predicate languages, and has the advantage that
eventual AI code can be modelled 1-1 on the theory.  When you phrase
the theoretical arguments in terms of the model, you can then test
consequences and have clear results which you can evaluate.  In
particular, the debate about unfilled places can be phrased in terms
of, what variable, anonymous or otherwise, belongs in the vacant
places, and what do you do with referent set members that match the
prototype thus constructed?  A question like that is much easier to
discuss, than to discuss the "reality", such as it is, of Lojban or
natural languages.

                -- jimc



=== 2 | 1991-11-03T06:56:18Z | CJ FINE <cbmvax!uunet!pucc.princeton.edu!91909372> | 9111020342.aa06088@relay1.uu.net | mail/lojban-list/cur/689151378.d921b556b0d98f8a.jbomohi:2,S
Arthur Protin:
>
>     Every message (a unit of communication) contains countless
> "meta-messages" on an endless variety of topics.  For example,
> that first sentence includes: "I am alive", "this conversation
> is in English", "I want you to change your view of things", etc.

Yes, BUT you need to be very careful what you mean by 'contains',
'includes' - these are not the same as 'implies'. Pragmaticists
distinguish 'implication' (logical or material) from 'implicature' -
which is saying something like "in the social or other environment we
have in common I am inviting you to conclude the following", but which
can for example be explicitly overridden with no contradiction. I would
suggest that 'I am alive' and 'I want you to change your view of things'
are at best implicatures, and 'this conversation is in English' is a
meta-statement that cannot be regarded as implied by the original in any
sensible way.
        These distinctions are not just pedantry, but I rather think
point to a resolution to this argument. I suggest (using traditional
terminaology because I haven't learnt the Lojban terms yet) that:

Using an explicit argument or prepositional phrase ASSERTS that the
relation holds that is expressed by that argument place or preposition, and
IMPLICATES that the following argument is the kind of object etc which
normally holds such a relation;

Leaving out a positional argument or a prepositional phrase IMPLICATES
that there is a suitable, but unexpressed argument; but such implicature
may be overridden by a more general implicature that the semantics of
the predicate do not allow for such an argument.

> And just as the null action is an action, so too the null message
> is a message and the elipsed place is a place.  When I don't
> say where I am going it is because I feel that the express
> conveys my intent better without it.  It may not exist, I may
> expect you to already know it, I may want to keep it a secret,
> I may be getting forgetful in my old age.

I think you are putting too much intention in here. There are
circumstances, certainly, in which we choose every word with care, but
many utterances are not thought out so precisely. There is a sense in
which what you say is true, to be sure, but I think that it is often a
trivial sense.

>     Clearly, anything that could have been hung on there, that
> was not hung there, was not hung there for a reason! Just as any
> places that were unfilled were unfilled for a reason.  And since
> we have evolved to the point that we find we need to add places
> to the relations (bridi) that are not part of the stock definition,
> we should see that the expressed relations are only an approximation
> to what we really are thinking and talking about.  As such, I
> find the distinction between "klama" and "litru" very arbitrary,
> undesirable, and misleading.

In spite of what I have said above, I agree with you here.

        Kolen Fain

(c.j.fine@bradford.ac.uk)


