# mail/lojban-list thread 9a1aa2ef239f-no_subject | root 9106260847.aa19950@relay1.uu.net | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1991-06-26T07:09:31Z | STEVE L RICE <cbmvax!uunet!ALASKA.BITNET!CORNELLC.cit.cornell.edu!FTSLR> | 9106260847.aa19950@relay1.uu.net | mail/lojban-list/cur/677920171.9a1aa2ef239f4bce.jbomohi:2,S
I have begun to suspect that a personal message to lojbab was posted to
the list.  It started out "Dear Mr. LeChevalier:"  (hardly the way I'd
begin a general posting).  While I do reserve the right to deal with
someone personally when I have a grievance, to do so before an audience
would be a shameful bit of character assassination, which I deplore as much
as gossip.  If it was posted, I apologize to the list and to Mr. LeChevalier;
I never meant to engage in a public flame.  In fact, I promised him early
on that I wouldn't do so.

In view of my increasing alarm at certain problems, and the evident
impossibility of getting much of a hearing, I tried to drop out of the
mailing-list and out of lojbania (or whatever you call it).  I am told
that I am the only linguist at TLI.  I find this rather hard to believe,
but even if it's true, the instinct for language is unusually strong.
Here, the people who do have an understanding of language are either
shouted down or ignored, for the most part.  Shoulson, Urban, and to
a lesser extent jimc (who seems impervious to criticism) aren't given
the attention they deserve.  They're your brightest members; don't cast
them aside.  I suspect that TLI has at least one more linguist than LLG.
A linguist wouldn't say some of the things I've encountered, and wouldn't
be comfortable in a project which seems, to my genuine regret, an outsized
computer game.  And my regret is genuine.  I'm not a Loglan lapdog; I have
ties to several projects, and I hoped that Lojban would be one of them.
But I concluded that I could not be involved, and on several grounds would
not be comfortable in your group.  Return to your regular discussions.  You
don't want a linguist, or a student of constructed languages, not even one
who in some small ways championed you before the Loglan Academy recently.
You want a Lojban lapdog.  And I'm not one of those, either.

I would appreciate being removed from the mailing-list (this is about the
fourth time I've asked).

Sia, uu loa, hue la Stiv Rais.


