# mail/lojban-list thread b89ecdb8cb84-planned_languages_server | root m0jdxwv-0000g8c@snark.thyrsus.com | 2 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1991-05-17T05:38:00Z | lojbab | m0jdxwv-0000g8c@snark.thyrsus.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/674458680.b89ecdb8cb84c6f5.jbomohi:2,S

A note of clarification that seems to have been missed in the recent
discussion on electronic distribution.

There is NO 'class A' material released for distribution yet.  John Cowan
is one of the committee membersUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUU%&"{le]p



Oops - line dropped.  Lets try this again.

There is no 'class A mateiral' yet.  John Cowan is one of a committee
charged with developing a policy, and specifically with getting comments
from all of you on it.  The policy statement he posted was for comment
as has not been adopted.  Something similar will likely be approved at
the June LogFest meeting - to whcih everyone is invoited, of course.

Until then, there is not SUPPOSED to be anything on the Planned Langugages
Server, and anything there is unofficial and unapproved.  I don't vouch
for it, and we aren;t supporting it.  At last word, the "index lojban"
command was a lucky guess, because "lojban" didn't appear in the directory
of indexes.

If you NEED something that is up there now, fine - go ahead, it is probably
valid.  But we are not going to post anything new until after a policy is
adopted.  To give an example why, the brochure is absolutely going to be
out of date within a month, becausewe will be changing some other policioes
besides the elctronic one.  (There has been close to 0 cash in since JL14
came out - only a couple people have sent money for orders, and no one for
almost nothing for balances.  Since $2000 was spent on JL14 and LK14, our brief financioal
security is gone again.  Decisions, tough ones, will have to be made, or there
will be no textbook, and LLG may have to go inactive because I'll have to go
to work to make income.  I intend that this not happen, hence I'm sure that
something in our policy will have to change.  

The elctronic distribution policy is hostage to our financial situation.  If
we cannot get enough donations and paid sales of the stuff we send out, we cannot afford to give it away free.  Not enough of you are paying now.  I find it
difficult to work on producing new stuff when I can;t see how to get it to
all the people who want it (electronic-only distribution is NOT an option
because of a requirement for fairness to those without net access.

Hopefully this comment will stir some productive debate.  So far I've heard a
little bit about what people want to see, and more - in the parser pricing
discussion, on what people are willing to do on one item.  I'd like to
see someone come up with an idea on how LLG can get its 250 JL subscribers
and 350 LK subscribers to contrinute the net $10000-$15000 we will spend this
year, most of which will not be eliminated through electronic distribution.

----
lojbab = Bob LeChevalier, President, The Logical Language Group, Inc.
         2904 Beau Lane, Fairfax VA 22031-1303 USA
         703-385-0273
         lojbab@snark.thyrsus.com



=== 2 | 1991-06-11T06:37:00Z | lojbab | m0jn2mg-0001jdc@snark.thyrsus.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/676622220.3a88152adbfb3912.jbomohi:2,S
I have just sent off to Jerry Altzman the first material to be officially
posted on the Planned Languages Server by The Logical Language Group, Inc.
These postings include:

1) the official gismu list - the public domain version that is widely
   distributed
2) a working proposal for gismu place structure clarifications and changes -
   this is the most current machine format version I know of.  It is for
   discussion purposes only.  (John Cowan has been erroneously calling
   place structures from this proposal the 'new place structure'.  This is
   incorrect, and I ask that any place structure other than the official
   one be identified as a 'proposed' place structure.)  This new list is
   compatible with the new revision of LogFlash, and should be the target
   format to be dealt with by any other efforts at flash card processing -
   we may chnage place structures but will not change the format.
3) The draft review of 4th edition >Loglan 1< that was later condensed and
   published in JL.  This draft version has some typos and minor places where
   rewording would help, but seemed appropriate for posting since apparently
   a lot of Institute Loglanists are looking at our material.  It sets out
   some of the technical flaws in Institute Loglan, and more importantly in
   the revised book that the Institute published; a lot of the details were
   left out of the condensed version.

Jerry.  Please let us know when these have been installed, or if you
have any problems with what I sent you.

Depending on the decisions at LogFest on electronic distribution policy,
I will be sending considerably more material for posting on PLS.  The
cmavo list and the grammar, for example, are awaiting decisions on the
changes proposed in JL14 and since then.  There will be a new version of
the Lojban brochure, hopefully including a version translated into
Esperanto as well as the English form; the French translation of the
older brochure will also be posted pending someone who wants to update
it.  Athelstan has written an electronic version of his mini-lesson, and
I am nearing completion of extracting the Lojbanized source language
etymologies for all of the gismu.

Feedback on this material is of course welcome.  I will be happy to
incorporate a rebuttal from Steve Rice or any other responsible
Institute spokesperson into the Loglan 1 review file.  (I offered the same
to JCB, but received no reply.)
----
lojbab = Bob LeChevalier, President, The Logical Language Group, Inc.
         2904 Beau Lane, Fairfax VA 22031-1303 USA
         703-385-0273
         lojbab@snark.thyrsus.com


