# mail/lojban-list thread d8555bd19f5d-completely_destroying_my_reputation%2E%2E%2E | root oveg61w164w@cellar.uucp | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1991-07-21T21:29:23Z | cbmvax!uunet!cellar!marquidf | oveg61w164w@cellar.uucp | mail/lojban-list/cur/680131763.d8555bd19f5dd83e.jbomohi:2,S
Armed only with copies of the cmavo and gismu lists, I entered my favorite 
local hip coffeehouse, Cafe' Kairos, sat down, and commenced to writing down 
some of the observed events, in Lojban. I was suprised that it came to me so 
fluently, though I had only left behind my feeling of complete confusion a 
few short weeks ago.
 
A number of the Kairos regulars have taken an interest in my *lingua franca 
du jour*. One night, I even enlisted the help of two of my pals to make 
suggestions for tanru and lujvo about sexual and mental-illness-related 
concepts. They picked up on the concepts very quickly, though I doubt whether 
they remembered anything beyond *fenki* and *cinse*.
 
I got several pages of observations, and I'm posting the "best" of them. 
First, for your reading (dis)pleasure, the Lojban-only text; then, for the 
confused and amused, my three-line translation (English, interlinear Jbogic, 
and Lojban).
 
Keep in mind, I still have complete command of neither the gismu nor the 
cmavo sets, and am still weak on several points of grammar. Since I'm in a 
relative hurry, I only corrected the text once. This is probably as close to 
quick spontaneous written Lojban as I dare to admit to.
 
-----------------------------
 
ni'oni'oni'o la xanict zvati le ckafyzda me'e "kairos"
 
ni'o mi na ca lifri le zabna ri .e mi .a'ije.ai na [cru]dunku vo'e .i glare 
je jaurvacri .i su'e pare remna cu ca zvati ti .i mi caca'a kakne le nu cusku 
lojbo
 
ni'o la lusis je la marias cu tavla vo'a .i la lusis pa'a ca citka xiltitna'a 
[glibau "doughnut"] .i piro mi'a cu zukte zo'o ka masno 
 
ni'o lo nanmu pu cusku le si'o zoi "mocha" se krasi be la banxauaii .i mi pu 
na djuno la'edi'u .i mi pu pensi poi ke'o se krasi be la banritalian 
 
ni'o la djysten goi ko'a ca co'a tavla fi la syr,gauuen .ije ko'a se tavla lu 
-- ko sisti -- li'u la .ouyn
 
ni'o la stiv je la bet puze'a klama ti .i stiv goi ko'a pu djica le nu ko'a 
tavla la tcip la ko'a zgika sanze'a .i seba'i la'edi'u la stiv pu lebna 
leko'a sanze'a la kairos
 
ni'o la endis je leko'a xlipe'o poi ke'o ponse xunre kerfa cu ca klama
 
ni'o la patsis.klain cu sanga lu -- lezu'o cadzu ba la midycte -- li'u ra'i 
le zgidribra .i patsis na'o sanga loi driselsanga poi glibau zoi blues do'u
ni'o cabna fa .endis je ko'a xlipe'o cu cliva .i co'o se cusku
 
ni'o pa drata xunkrexli cu ca zvati .i mi pensi loi nixli cu nelci le kerfa 
xunre
 
ni'o leli'i ciska cu sutra sesi'u le mi mu'e cilre lojbo .i mi pu lifri 
lemu'e pa'a cilre la banresperanton .i mi zabna cilre tai ti
 
ni'o mi caba tcidu lojban lemi lojbo kasrcku .i co'o cabna
 
--------------------------------------
 
And now for the more readable 3-liner:
 
--------------------------------------
 
pasosopanac zemast renoded
1991year    7month 20 day
 
 
la xanict zvati le ckafyzda me'e "kairos"
The Sixday at the coffeenest named "Kairos"
Saturday at Cafe' Kairos
 
mi na ca lifri le zabna ri .e mi .a'ije.ai na [cru]dunku vo'e 
I don't now experience that which is favorable to me and I (effort,intention) 
won't (speak-)anguish about it
I don't feel good tonight but I'm not going to bitch about it.
 
.i glare je jaurvacri 
(observed) hot and water-air
It's hot and humid (weather). (author's note: 97f/39c)
 
.i su'e pare remna cu ca zvati ti 
at most twelve persons are now at here
There are a dozen people here tonight, at most.
 
.i mi caca'a kakne le nu cusku lojbo
I now actually am able to do the event of expressing Lojban
I can really work in Lojban now.
 
ni'o la lusis je la marias cu tavla vo'a
(new) Lucy and Maria talk to each other (x1)
Lucy and Maria are talking to each other.
 
.i la lusis pa'a ca citka xiltitna'a [glibau "doughnut"] 
Lucy also now eats a wheel-sweet-bread [English, "doughnut"]
Lucy is also eating a doughnut now.
 
.i piro mi'a cu zukte zo'o ka masno
all-of us-not-you act (activate humor spin) the quality of slow
We are all moving kind o' slow.
 
ni'o lo nanmu pu cusku le si'o zoi "mocha" 
(new) a man expressed the idea that "mocha"
se krasi be la banxauaii 
originated from the Hawaiian language
A man said that the word "mocha" is from the Hawaiian.
 
.i mi pu na djuno la'edi'u
I did not know (previous reference)
I didn't know that.
 
.i mi pu pensi poi ke'o se krasi be la banritalian
I thought such-that that originated from the Italian language
I thought it was from Italian.
 
ni'o la djysten goi ko'a ca co'a tavla fi la syr,gauuen 
(new) Justin who is he-1 now starts talking about Sir Gowen.
Justin just started talking about Sir Gowen.
 
.i e. ko'a se tavla lu -- ko sisti -- li'u la .ouyn
And he-1 gets told "make-it-true-that-you stop" by Owen
Owen tells him "stop".
 
ni'o la stiv je la bet puze'a klama ti
(new) Steve and Beth for a period before came here.
Steve and Beth came in for a little bit.
 
.i stiv goi ko'a pu djica le nu ko'a tavla la tcip la ko'a
zgika sanze'a 
Steve who is he-1 wanted the event he-1 talks to Chip about his-1 music 
sound-increaser
Steve wanted to talk to Chip about his (Steve's) amplifier.
 
.i seba'i la'edi'u la stiv pu lebna leko'a sanze'a la kairos
instead of the last thing, Steve took his-1 amplifier from Kairos
Failing that, Steve took his amplifier back from Kairos.
 
ni'o la endis je leko'a xlipe'o poi 
(new) Andy and his girlfriend such that:
ke'o ponse xunre kerfa cu ca klama
she has red hair -- come
Andy and his girlfriend, who has red hair, have come in.
 
ni'o la patsis.klain cu sanga lu lezu'o cadzu ba la midycte li'u
(new) Patsy Cline is singing "Walking After Midnight"
ra'i le zgidribra 
from source the music-ribbon-apparatus
Patsy Cline is singing "W.A.M." on the tape player.
 
.i patsis na'o sanga loi driselsanga poi glibau zoi blues do'u
Patsy typically sings those sad-songs which (English) are "blues"
Patsy sings sad songs which are called "the blues" in English.
 
ni'o cabna fa .endis je ko'a xlipe'o cu cliva 
(new) now Andy and his girlfriend leave
Andy and his girlfriend are leaving now.
 
.i co'o se cusku
partings are expressed
We say goodbye.
 
ni'o pa drata xunkrexli cu ca zvati 
(new) one other red-hair-girl is now here
Another red haired girl is here now.
 
.i mi pensi loi nixli cu nelci le kerfa xunre
I think the-mass-of-thouse-which-really-are girl like hair red
I think the girls all like red hair.
 
ni'o leli'i ciska cu sutra sesi'u le mi mu'e cilre lojbo 
(new) the experience of writing, fast helps my learning Lojban
Writing is helping me learn Lojban fast(er).
 
.i mi pu lifri lemu'e pa'a cilre la banresperanton 
I experienced the achievement also learning Esperanto.
I also experienced this while learning Esperanto.
 
.i mi zabna cilre tai ti
I favorably learn by method this
I learn well this way.
 
ni'o mi caba tcidu lojban lemi lojbo kasrcku 
(new) I now-will read lojban from my lojban together-book
I'm going off to read some Lojban from my assembled Lojban book.
 
.i co'o cabna
partings (observed) now
Bye now.
 
------------------------
 
Well, this is how I spend much of my free time. I hang out at (insufferably) 
hip coffeehouses, listening to Patsy Cline, getting wired, and taking notes 
on the haircolor of my friends' dates in Lojban. Is it any wonder that the 
local constabulary amuse themselves on slow nights by reading from my case 
files?
 
co'omi'e tuerp


