# mail/lojban-list thread f07c65ca26cf-paragraph_2,_polish_story | root 9107220751.aa14396@munagin.ee.mu.oz.au | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 1991-07-22T07:51:26Z | cbmvax!uunet!ee.mu.OZ.AU!nsn | 9107220751.aa14396@munagin.ee.mu.oz.au | mail/lojban-list/cur/680169086.f07c65ca26cf7214.jbomohi:2,S

Sur la Eskvilina monteto, inter la arboj, kovritaj de la nokta mallumo, Numa
jxetis sin teren kaj lia vizagxo falis sur la herbojn, malsekajn de nokta
roso. Super li aperis la regxo de l' tondro kaj de l' favoroj, de l' mallibero
kaj de la liberigo. Li aperis en lumajxo, teruranta la homajn pupilojn, en
vesto fleksita kiel la cigno, kun aglo cxe la flanko kaj kun arko, strecxita
per fulmo, en la mano. La arboj  senmovigxis, silentigxis la murmuroj kaj la
sonoj de l' tero; en tiu cxi silento de teruro kaj de atendo ekbruis la vocxo
de Jupitero:

--- Sur mian altaron, por kvietigi mian koleron, metu morgaux kvincent kapojn!

On the hill Esquilina, between the trees covered by the night's darkness,
Numa threw himself to the ground and his face fell onto the grass, wet from
the night dew. Above him appeared the king og thunder and favours, of
lack of liberty and of liberation. He appeared in a bright thing, which
terrified human pupils, in clothes bent like a swan, with an eagle at the
side and with a bow, stretched by a lightning bolt, in the hand. The trees
became motionless, silent became the mumbling and the sounds of the earth;
in this silence of terror and expectancy the voice of Jupiter began (or:
suddenly) made noise:

--- Onto my altar, in order to quell my anger, you will place tomorrow
five hundred heads!

ni'o la numam. gapru la .eskualinas. gi'e jbini lei tricu gi'e se vanbi
lo ctemanku

(Para) Numa is above the Esqualina and between some trees and in an environ-
ment of the night-dark thing.

.i ko'a renro ko'a le dertu .ije leko'a flira cu farlu lei srasu noi to'e
sudga ki'u le nicte nu djacu likybi'o

He1 throws Him1 onto the earth. And, He1's face falls onto the mass of grass
which is undry because of the night event of water liquifying.

.i ga'u ko'a co'a se zgana le traji cevni no'u ko'e fi lo lidni .e lo nundju
.e lonu na'e zifre .e lonu zifri'a

Above Him1 started to be observed the superlative god (that's He2) of lightning
and of helping and of the event of non freedom and of the event of freeing.

.idu'ibo se zgana fa ko'e ne ne'i lo gusni poi tepri'a lo'e remna kanla

Equivalently, there was observed He2, who is in the light such that it 
caused fear in a typical human eye.

.i dasni lo korcu pe ta'i le cipnrkigno .i mlana lo cipnrakuila gi'e jgari
lo korcu cectci noi se tcena lo lidni

Wears a bent thing which is in the form of a swan. On the side of an eagle
and holding a bent launching tool which is streched by a lightning bolt.

.i lei tricu co'u se muvdu .i loi savru be le dertu co'a smaji

The mass of trees abruptly stopped being moved. The mass of noises of the
earth started being silent.

.ibazibo va'o le nunsma pe lo nunteprai zi'epe lo nundenpa le voksa be la
.IUpiter sance

Shortly afterwards in the environment of the silence associated with terrifying
and waiting the voice of Jupiter sounded:

.ilu lemi sefi'ijbu mu'i lenu ko mliri'a lemi nunfe'u cu se cpana ca le
bavlamdei munonole stedu li'u

"My offerings table, so that you must milden my anger, will have on top of
it at the time of tomorrow five hundred things described as heads!"


