# mail/lojban-list thread 4013280be26c-lojban_and_pr | root 4ae1bfdf-61ba-4539-84e0-0a56a67480fd@u13g2000vbx.googlegroups.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2011-10-22T18:34:14Z | jongausib <so.cool.ogi@gmail.com> | 4ae1bfdf-61ba-4539-84e0-0a56a67480fd@u13g2000vbx.googlegroups.com | mail/lojban-list/cur/1319308454.4013280be26cac00.jbomohi:2,S
coi ro le lojbo prami
I've been thinking a lot about the future of lojban since I started to
learn it this summer.

I really think that lojban has great potential of becoming the most
significant transnational language; to be a cultural neutral language
in contexts where global issues matters rather than national-local
culture, ijo to use as a scientific language etc. And I think that
there's a need among the people of the world to have something as a
common global platform to gather around as the world becomes both more
diversified and more unified. Something which is the language of the
civic society, not just of those who got most symbolic, political and
economic power.

But this is not going to happen unless lojbanists make it happen. So I
think we have to organize ourselves better, making strategies of how
we can market/promote lojban efficiently so more people get to know
that the language exists. And a very important concern: if lojban ever
becomes succesful, so how can we prevent it from being swallowed by
economic interests? Who got the patent? Who is/are able of selling it?

I'm new as jbopli, maybe you have already discussed the visions and
future goals of lojban a lot. Anyway, there are some things I have
noticed. The lojban.org website isn't very welcoming nor clear. I
think that's the first impression of lojban new potential jbopli will
make. The design could be much better (but I've figured out that
there's too much to be done for Mr Powell alone). If I could wish just
some improvements that would be a project list (with different actual
projects in lojban, for example chemistry nomenclature project,
translations in progress, news in the lojban community etc) and a
userlist (where perhaps you may register your skill resources, for
example if you're an expert of birds, which language-skills you have,
professional experience of translation or programming, etc).

And I'm sorry, but I also think the logo would have to be more
attractive. Even the simple logo of Toki pona is a far more positive
and attractive logo: en.tokipona.org.

uikipedias doesn't look so good either. Couldn't you just use
templates from for example the swedish or spanish wikipedias (I like
the design of those versions better than the english in fact). I've
also been thinking of copy the lexical structure of other wikipedias.
That would result in a lot of empty pages for now, but at least that
would be a good structure to start with. Because jbo.uikipedias is
going to be the scientific standard in the future - iepei!?;)

I'm neither a skilled jbopli or a webdesigner, so unfortunately I
can't contribute much, except with my opinions.
My own goal right now is to be able to speak and write lojban fluent,
and that will take a while I think. Next goal for me is to start
marketing and teaching lojban here in Sweden. And I feel really
serious about this.

So any ideas how the lojban movement could be more outgoing, organized
and professional?

mu'o mi'e jongausib.

-- 
You received this message because you are subscribed to the Google Groups "lojban" group.
To post to this group, send email to lojban@googlegroups.com.
To unsubscribe from this group, send email to lojban+unsubscribe@googlegroups.com.
For more options, visit this group at http://groups.google.com/group/lojban?hl=en.



