# mail/lojban-beginners thread 061ba45e16b4-crazy_thing_for_a_friend | root 7f1d42860911010115m3b9e6768n9c7f3bac94bdf5b@mail.gmail.com | 1 messages | rendered by jbomohi mail-v1

=== 1 | 2009-11-01T08:15:41Z | Ryan Leach <rsw.leach@gmail.com> | 7f1d42860911010115m3b9e6768n9c7f3bac94bdf5b@mail.gmail.com | mail/lojban-beginners/cur/1257063341.061ba45e16b4ffa5.jbomohi:2,S
I have a friend who is huge into the novel "Ishmael". He asked me to
translate this thing he wrote into lojban. I have no idea why, but it
was good practice. Most of the lujvo I used were straight from
jbovlaste. Some of them translated funny when I checked my work in the
lojban translator though- so bear that in mind when reading this.

This was his original text- I have only tried to retain intended
meaning not literal meaning.

I promise By Honor, By Blood, By Tribe
I promise to worship no king or god, spouse or parent, man or beast or
anything of which I may conceive.
I promise to honor and defend the Seven Generation Law.
I promise never to wage war as the Dreamers wage war, and to oppose
such wars when and where I find them.
I promise not to impose my preferences regarding how to live on
others, respecting the idea that there is no single right way to live.

Le cemlanzu returns as tribe in jbovlaste, but translates as tribal in
the lojban translator, but I have nothing better to replace is with
currently.

I asked him what a dreamer was, and apparently it's his word for
colonialists, or industrial first world people like us. I played
around with that and came up with nolpre or noble people (meaning
elite classes not noble as in upstanding). I also swapped honor for
name in the original promise, and removed the repetition of I promise
in each line- mostly because I'm lazy.

cesri'isi'a is the word jbovlaste returns for worship (although it's a
real tongue twister to mean- so I'm open to alternate ways to say
'worship'). The lojban translator renders rorlei as 'engendering
classes', but jbovlaste returns is as 'generations'- which is how I
used it here (again, I welcome alternate versions of the word).
friji'etadji is my own awkward lujvo translating in the lojban
translator as 'experienc-ing-liv-ing-method', and was my attempt at
translating ' preferences regarding how to live' which I figured could
easily reworked as 'lifestyle'. I didn't want to use jmive alone,
because it seems to mean a state of being alive, rather than 'living'
in the way that the word is used in English. So I added lifri, or to
experience or face something, and tadji or method of doing something
to get the lujvo I ended up with here.

I'm also less than certain about the relative clause in the first part
of the last line. My intent was to render the last line as "I will not
force the event-of people using my experiencing-life-method." I'm not
sure if I got that right, even after running it through thelojban
translator.

Okay, so that's a long winded intro- here's my attempt at converting
my friend's promise into lojban.

.i mi nupre ja'i lemi cmene .e lemi ciblu .e le cemlanzu
.i mi na cesri'isi'a lo cevni .e lo lijda .e lo nobli .e lo prenu .e lo dacti
.i mi zuksi'a .ije bandu le ze rorlei flalu
.i mi na nolpre jamna lo prenu .e lo danlu .e lo spati .ije mi roroi
fapro lo nolpre jamna
.i mi na bapli nu lo prenu cu pilno le mi friji'etadji .i le pamei
drani tadji cu to'e zasti

thanks for  the once over guys
-- 
“Nothing bothers me more than sloth. The objective is to fix mistakes
of ambition and not make mistakes of sloth. I work my ass off.”
-Tim Ferriss



